<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-29" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Isabel makes the paynim take her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather than he his wicked will should gain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, having his unhappy error read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeks to appease his wounded spirit in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He builds a bridge, and strips those thither led;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But falls from it with Roland the insane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who thence, of him regardless, endlong speeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by the road achieves prodigious deeds.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>O feeble and unstable minds of men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How quickly our intentions fluctuate!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All thoughts we lightly change, but mostly when</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These from some lover’s quarrel take their date.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now, so wroth I saw that Saracen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With woman, so outrageous in his hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I weened not only he would ill assuage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But never more would calm, his amorous rage.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That which he rashly uttered to your blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye gentle dames, does so my spirit grieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till I his error teach him, to his shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He shall no quarter at my hands receive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So him with pen and page will I proclaim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, whosoever reads me, shall believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had better held⁠—aye, better bit, his tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than ever have your sex with slander stung.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But that in this the witless infidel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spake as a fool, the event demonstrates clear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even now, with dagger drawn, that paynim fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fury on all women whomsoe’er.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next him so touched one look of Isabel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She quickly made his fickle purpose veer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For her, scarce seen, and to that warrior strange,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would his Doralice already change;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, as new love the king did heat and goad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He moved some arguments of small avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To shake her steadfast spirit, which abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wholly with God; but he, her shield and mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hermit, lest she from the better road</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should wander, and her chaste intention fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With stronger arguments with him contended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still, as best he could, the dame defended.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The king, who long had taxed himself to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monk’s bold sermon to his sore displeasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vainly bade him to his cell repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anew, without that damsel, at his leisure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet seeing he would still his patience dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor peace with him would keep, nor any measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon that preacher’s chin his right-hand laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whatsoe’er he grasped, as rudely flayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And (so his fury waxed) that, as it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With tongs, he griped his neck, and after he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had whirled him once or twice about in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dismist him form his hand towards the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say not⁠—know not, what befell him there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many the rumours are, and disagree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One says, “he burst upon a rock’s rude bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lay one shapeless jelly, heels and head.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He fell into the sea,” by one is said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Distant three miles and more; and, in that sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He having prayer, and Ave vainly made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he knew not how to swim, was drowned.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Others report, “a Saint bestowed his aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dragged him with a visible hand aground.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whichever be the reading of this mystery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of him I speak no further in mine history.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cruel King Rodomont, when from his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had removed the prating eremite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With visage less disturbed, again applied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To that sad lady, heartless with affright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in the language used by lovers, cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“She was his very heart, his life, his light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She was his comfort, and his dearest hope;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all such words as have that common scope.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now, so temperate showed that infidel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twould seem that he no violence designed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gentle semblance of fair Isabel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enamoured him, so tamed his haughty mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, though he might that goodly kernel shell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim would not pass beyond the rhind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who that its favour would be lost, believed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless ’twere as a gift from her received;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And by degrees so thought to mould the dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his desires. She in that lone retreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And savage, open to his evil aim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And like a mouse, beneath Grimalkin’s feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had liefer found herself i’ the midst of flame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ever on one thought her fancy beat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“If any mode, if any way, remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To scape that wilful man, untouched, unstained.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sad Isabella in her mind is bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To slay herself with her own hand, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That fell barbarian compass his intent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be the means to make her wrong so sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That cavalier, by cruel Fortune spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within her loving arms, to whom she swore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With mind to him devoted, his to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vowing to Heaven perpetual chastity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She sees that paynim monarch’s passion blind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Increasing still, nor what to do she knows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well knows what foul intention is behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which she is all too feeble to oppose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet moving many matters in her mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Finds out at last a refuge for her woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And means to save her chastity from shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(How I shall say) with clear and lasting fame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She cried unto that paynim, foul to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already threatening her with word and act,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now devoid of all that courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he in the beginning did enact,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“If thou mine honour wilt ensure to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond suspicion, I, upon this pact,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will upon thee bestow what shall o’erpay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By much, that honour thou wouldst take away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For pleasure, which endures so brief a space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith this ample world does so o’errun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reject not lightly a perpetual grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A real joy, to be postponed to none.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of women everywhere of pleasing face</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hundred and a thousand may be won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But none beside me, or few others, live</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who can bestow the boon which I can give.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I know, and on my way a herb did view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And nearly know where I on this could light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, being boiled with ivy and with rue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Over a fire with wood of cypress dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And squeezed, when taken from the caldron, through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Innocent hands, affords a juice of might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith whoever thrice his body laves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Destructive steel or fire securely braves.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-359" id="noteref-359" epub:type="noteref">359</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If thrice therewith he bathe himself, I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His flesh no weapon for a month shall score:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He once a month must to his body lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mine unction, for its virtue lasts not more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This liquor can I make, and will to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thou to-day shalt also prove my lore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well, I trust, thou shalt more grateful be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than were all Europe won to-day by thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“In guerdon for this present, I request</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou to me upon thy faith wilt swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou never wilt my chastity molest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In word or deed.” So spake that damsel fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Rodomont who heard, again represt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His evil will: for so he longed to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A charmed life, that readily he more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Isabel of him demanded swore;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And will maintain his promise, till the fact</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vouched of that wondrous water shall appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And force himself, meanwhile, to do no act,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To show no sign of violence; but the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolves he will not after keep the pact,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As one who holds not God or saint in fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to that king, regardless of his oath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All lying Afric yields in breach of troth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Argier’s perfidious king to Isabel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than a thousand times assurance swore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In case that water rendered him what fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Achilles and what Cygnus were of yore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, aye by beetling cliff and darksome dell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Away from city and from farm, a store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of herbs collected, nor this while e’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abandoned by the paynim cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When herbs enow by them in many a beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With or without their roots, collected were,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-360" id="noteref-360" epub:type="noteref">360</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At a late hour, the twain to their retreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Betook them; and, throughout night’s remnant, there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That paragon of continence did heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What simples she had culled, with mickle care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While to those mysteries and her every deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pagan, present still, gave curious heed;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who, wearing out the weary night in sport,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—He and those followers that with him remained⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had suffered thirst in such a grievous sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the fierce fire in that small cave contained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That drinking round, in measure full or short,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Graecian wine two barrels had they drained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A booty which those squires who served the Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From travellers seized a day or two before.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To Argier’s warlike king, unused to wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Cursed, and forbidden by his law, esteemed)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The liquor, tasted once, appeared divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweeter than nectar or than manna seemed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, quaffing largely, now of Ishmael’s line</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sober use deserving censure deemed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So fast their cups with that good wine they fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each reveller’s head is whirling like a mill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile that lady from the fire does lift</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pot, wherein she cooked those herbs, and cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Rodomont; “In proof I not adrift</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have launched the words I spake, in random guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—By <em>that</em>, which can the truth form falsehood sift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Experience, which can make the foolish wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even now the thing shall to thyself be shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not on another’s body, but my own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I first will trial make” (that lady said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Of this choice liquor with rare virtue blest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest haply thou shouldst harbour any dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That mortal poison form these herbs be prest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this will I anoint myself, from head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Downwards below the naked neck and breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then prove on me thy faulchion and thine arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prove if one can smite, the other harm.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She washed, as said, and gladly did decline</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her neck to that unthinking pagan’s brand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unthinking, and perhaps o’ercome by wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which neither helm, nor mail, nor shield withstand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That brutish man believed her, and, in sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of faith, so struck with cruel steel and hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That her fair head, erewhile Love’s place of rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He severed from the snowy neck and breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This made three bounds, and thence in accents clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was heard a voice which spake Zerbino’s name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To follow whom, escaping Sarza’s peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So rare a way was taken by the dame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spirit! which nobly didst esteem more dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy plighted faith, and chaste and holy name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Things hardly known, and foreign to our time)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than thine own life and thine own blooming prime!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Depart in peace, O spirit blest and fair!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—So had my verses power! as evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I would assay, with all that happy care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which so adorns and points poetic lore!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as renowned should be thy story rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thousands and thousands of long years and more!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Depart in peace to radiant realms above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leave to earth the example of thy love!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His eyes from heaven did the Creator bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the stupendous and unequalled feat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said: “I thee above that dame commend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose death drove Tarquin from his royal seat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I to register a law intend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid those which ages change not as they fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which⁠—I attest the inviolable river⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unchanged through future times, shall last for ever.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-361" id="noteref-361" epub:type="noteref">361</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I will that all, in every future age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who bear thy name, be blest with genius high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be courteous, gentle, beautiful, and sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the real pitch of honour fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That to their glory the historic page</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They may with worthy argument supply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that for aye Parnassus’ hill and well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall ring with Isabel and Isabel.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake the Sire; and cleared the ambient air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hushed beyond its wont the heaving main.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the third heaven her chaste soul made repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in Zerbino’s arms was locked again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On earth, with shame and sorrow for his share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That second Breuse sans pity did remain;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-362" id="noteref-362" epub:type="noteref">362</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, when digested was the maddening bowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lamented sore his error, sad at soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That placated, or in some content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sainted soul of Isabel might be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, if to death that damsel he had shent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He might at least revive her memory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, as a means to compass his intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would turn into a tomb that church, where he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inhabited, and where she buried lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To you shall be related in what wise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In all parts round about this chosen site,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For love or fear, he master-masons found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, making full six thousand men unite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stript of their heavy stones the mountains round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And raised a fabric ninety yards in height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From its extremest summit to the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he within its walls the church enclosed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein entombed the lovers twain reposed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This nearly imitates that pile beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Old Tyber’s stream, by Adrian built;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-363" id="noteref-363" epub:type="noteref">363</a> and nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sepulchre, will he a tower provide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein he purposes some time to lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A narrow bridge, and only two yards wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He flung across the stream which rolled fast by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long, but so scanty is that bridge, with pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The narrow pass two coursers can contain;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Two coursers, that abreast have thither made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or else, encountering, on that causeway meet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor any where was ledge or barricade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To stay the horses’s fall, who lost his feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He wills <em>that</em> bridge’s toll be dearly paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Christian or by Moor, who pass his seat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For with a thousand trophies, arms, and vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That damsel’s tomb is destined to be drest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Within ten days, or shorter time, was placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bridge, whose arch across the stream was dight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not that pile and tower with equal haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were so conducted to their destined height.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet was the last so high, a sentry paced</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its top, who, whensoever any knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approached the bridge, was wont his lord to warn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sounding a signal on his bugle-horn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whereat he armed, and issued for the stower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now upon <em>one</em> and now the <em>other</em> side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For when a warrior pricked towards the tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him from the adverse bank that king defied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bridge affords the field their steeds must scour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, should one but a little swerve aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Peril unparalleled!) the horse will go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the deep and dangerous stream below.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The pagan had imagined, as a pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, risking oft to tumble in the course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Head-first into that stream, where he must drain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Huge draughts of water in his fall, parforce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would assoil and cleanse him from that stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereof excess in wine had been the source;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if what ill wine prompts to do or say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Water, as well as wine, could wash away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Soon thitherward flocked many a cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some who pursued the beaten road and plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since for wayfaring men, who southward steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No straighter lay for Italy or Spain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their courage and their honour, held more dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than life, excited others of the train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all, where they had hoped the meed of strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had lost their arms, and many arms and life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If those he conquers are of pagan strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He is content to take their arms and vest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of those first arrived the titles plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are written, and their arms suspended rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he in prison pens the christened train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(’Twould seem) to be to Argier’s realm addrest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not yet was brought that building to a head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When thitherward the crazed Orlando sped.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It chanced Orlando, in his furious mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came thither where that foaming river ran;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Rodomont beside the mighty flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was hurrying on his work; nor yet were done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tower and tomb, the bridge, scarce finished, stood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here⁠—save his casque was open⁠—Ulien’s son<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-364" id="noteref-364" epub:type="noteref">364</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Steeled cap-a-pee, stood ready armed for fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When to the bridge approached Anglantes’ knight.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-365" id="noteref-365" epub:type="noteref">365</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Orlando running thus his wild career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The barrier tops, and o’er the bridge would fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But sullen Rodomont, with troubled cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afoot, as he that tower is standing nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he disdains to brandish sword or spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shouts to him from afar with threatening cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Halt! thou intrusive churl and indiscreet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rash, meddling, saucy villain, stay thy feet!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Only for lord and cavalier was made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not for thee, dull slave, that bridge was meant.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To this no heed insane Orlando paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, fixt upon his purpose, forward went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“This madman must I school,” the paynim said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was approaching with the fell intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him into that deep river to dispatch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor deeming in such foe to find his match.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This while, a gentle damsel sought the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That towards that bridge across the river rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Richly arrayed and beautiful of face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who sage reserve in her demeanor showed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis she that, of her Brandimart in chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(If you remember, sir,) through every road</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And place her lover seeks in anxious wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Excepting Paris, where the warrior lies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Flordelice that bridge and tower was near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So was by name the wandering damsel hight)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grappling with Roland stood the Sarzan peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would into that river pitch the knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, conversant with Brava’s cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The miserable county knew aright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mighty marvel in that dame it raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see him rove, a naked man and crazed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She stopt, the issue of that strife to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein those two so puissant warriors vied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His opposite by might and main to throw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the stream each doughty champion tried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“How can a fool such mighty prowess show?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between his teeth, the furious paynim cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, shifting here and there, was seen to strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brimfull of pride, and anger, and disdain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This hand and now that other he puts out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take new hold, where he his vantage spies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now within Roland’s legs, and now without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Locks his right foot or left, in skilful wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus resembles, in that wrestling bout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stupid bear, who in his fury tries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tree, from whence he tumbled, to o’erthrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming it sole occasion of his woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Roland, whose better wit was lost withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know no where, and who used force alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That utmost force, to which this earthly ball</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply affords few paragons, or none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let himself backwards in that struggle fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embracing as he stood with Ulien’s son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together in the foaming stream they sank;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">High flashed the wave, and groaned the echoing bank.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quickly the stream asunder bore the pair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roland was naked, and like fish could swim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here shot his feet, his arms extended there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gained the bank; nor, when upon the brim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Halted to mark if his adventure were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Achieved with praise or shame: in evil trim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pagan, by his arms impeded sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With heavier pain and trouble, toiled ashore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Along the bridge which spanned that foaming tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did Flordelice meantime securely pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, having vainly sought on every side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brandimart’s bearing, since nor iron case</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor vest of his she anywhere espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She hoped to find the knight in other place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But here return we of the count to tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who left behind him stream, bridge tower, and cell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twere frenzy of his every frantic feat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To promise the relation, one by one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many and many⁠—should I these repeat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not when my story would be done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet some of his notorious deeds, and meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For mention in my song, will I make known:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor will I not that wondrous one recount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Near Thoulouse, on the Pyrenaean Mount.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Much country had been traversed by the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Urged by the furious rage which him misguides:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At last he reached the hill whose boundary height</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arragonese and neighbouring Frank divides.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither directing aye his course outright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the descending sun his visage hides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He reached a path upon the rugged steep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which overhung a valley dark and deep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here he by chance encountered in mid road</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two youths, that wood men were, and drove before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An ass along that pathway, with a load</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of logs; they, marking well what scanty store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of brain in poor Orlando’s head was stowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Called to the approaching knight, and threatened sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bidding him stand aside, or else go back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor to their hindrance block the common track.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To this address Orlando answered nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save that his foot he to their beast applied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote in mid-breast, which, with that vigour fraught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—That force exceeding every force beside⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tost him so hight, that the beholders thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It was a bird in air which they descried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ass upon a mountain-summit fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which rose above a mile beyond that dell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Upon those youths next sprang the furious knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With better luck than wit, one woodman shear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From that tall cliff, twice thirty yards in height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast himself headlong downward in his fear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him a moist patch of brambles, in his flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Received; and, amid grass and bushes, here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From other mischief safe, the stripling lit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for some scratches in his face was quit.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That other to a jutting fragment clung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who so to gain the higher steep would strive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he hopes, if once those crags among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To keep him from that fool he may contrive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But by the feet Orlando, ere he sprung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seized him, who will not leave the wretch alive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stretching them as wide as he could strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So stretched his arms, he rent his prey in twain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Even in such mode as often we descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Falconer by heron or by puller do;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose entrails he plucks out, to satisfy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Merlin or falcon that the game pursue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How happy was that other not to die!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who risked his neck in that deep bottom, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rehearsed the tale so often, Turpin heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And handed down to us the wondrous word.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These and more marvels does the count, who bends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His steps across that mountain to the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, seeking long a path, at length descends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the south, upon the land of Spain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His way along the beach he after wends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Near Arragon, beside the rumbling main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, ever prompted by his frenzy rank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will make himself a dwelling on the bank,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where he somedeal may shun the noontide ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With dry and powdery sea-sand covered o’er;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here, while so employed, upon their way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrives Angelica with her Medore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, as you have been told in former lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had from the hills descended on that shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within a yard or less approached the fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere yet she of his presence was aware.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So different from himself was he to sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nought of Orlando she in him surveyed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, from the time that rage possest his sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had gone naked forth in sun and shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had he been born on hot Syene’s site,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or sands where worship is to Ammon paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or nigh those hills, whence Nile’s full waters spin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando had not borne a dingier skin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nigh buried in their sockets are his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spare in his visage, and as dry as bone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dishevelled is his hair in woeful wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With frightful beard his cheek is overgrown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No sooner is he seen, than backward flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica, who, trembling sore, is flown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She shrieking loud, all trembling and dismayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Betakes her to her youthful guide for aid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When crazed Orlando was of her aware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seize the damsel he upsprang in haste;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So pleased the wretched count her visage fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So quickly was his mood inflamed: effaced</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In him all ancient recollections are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How she by him was whilom served and graced.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind her speech the count and hunts that dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As questing dog pursues the sylvan game.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The youth, that sees him chase his love who fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His courser spurs, and in pursuit is gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With naked faulchion after him he sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cut and thrust at Roland as he run.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from his shoulders hoped to cleave his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But found the madman’s skin as hard as bone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yea, harder far than steel, nor to be harmed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So good Orlando at his birth was charmed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When on his back Orlando felt him beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He turned, and turning on his youthful foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote with clenched fist, and force which nought can meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Smote on his horse’s head, a fearful blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with skull smashed like glass, that courser fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was by the madman’s furious stroke laid low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the same breath Orlando turned anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And chased the damsel that before him flew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At speed Angelica impelled her mare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whipt and spurred her evermore; whom slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She would esteem, albeit that palfrey were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet faster than a shaft dismist from bow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her ring she thought upon, and this the fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Placed in her mouth; nor failed its virtue now;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For putting it between her lips, like light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extinguished by a puff, she past from sight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Was it through fear, or was she, while she stript</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This from her finger, shaken in her seat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or was it rather, that her palfrey tript,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For neither <em>this</em> nor <em>that</em> I surely weet)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica, while ’twixt her lips she slipt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The virtuous ring, and hid her visage sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her stirrups lost; and, tumbling form the sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reversed upon the sand that lady fell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If but two inches short had fallen his prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon her would have pounced Orlando near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would have crushed her in his furious way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that kind Fortune saved her from the peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let her by other theft herself purvey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With other palfrey, as she did whilere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For never will she have this courser more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who chased by swift Orlando scours the shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Doubt not that she another will provide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And follow we in mad Orlando’s rear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose rage and fury nevermore subside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wroth that Angelica should disappear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After that beast along the sands he hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye gaining on the mare in this career.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, now he touches her, and lo! The mane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He grasps, and now secures her by the rein.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Orlando seizes her with that delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That other man might seize a damsel fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bit and bridle he adjusts aright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Springs on her back, and o’er the sea-beach bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For many miles impels the palfrey’s flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without repose or pause, now here, now there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever sell or bridle be displaced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor let her grass or heartening forage taste,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As in this course to o’erleap a ditch he sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Head over heels, she with her rider went:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor harmed was he, nor felt that tumble aright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But she, with shoulder slipt, lay foully shent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long how to bear her thence Orlando thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the end upon his shoulders hent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from the bottom climbed, thus loaded sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And carried her three bowshots’ length and more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next, for he felt that weight too irksome grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He put her down, to lead her by the rein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who followed him with limping gait and slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Come on,” Orlando cried, and cried in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, could the palfrey at a gallop go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This ill would satisfy his mood insane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The halter from her head he last unloosed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith her hind off-foot the madman noosed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis thus he comforts and drags on that mare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she may follow with more ease, so led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who whiles despoiled of flesh, and whiles of hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is scathed by stones which that ill road o’erspread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length the misused beast, with wear and tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the rude rocks, and suffering sore, lies dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando nought the slaughtered mare regards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor anywise his headlong course retards.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To drag that palfrey ceased he not, though dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Continuing still his course towards the west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all this while sacked hamlet, farm, and stead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whenever he by hunger was distrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And aye to glut himself with meat, and bread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fruit, he every one by force opprest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One by his hand was slain, one foully shent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seldom he stopt, and ever onward went.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As much, or little less, would do the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By his own love, did not that damsel hide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because the wretch discerns not black from white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And harms where he would help. A curse betide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wonder-working ring, and eke the wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who gave it to that lady, full or pride!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since Roland, but for this, would venge the scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He and a thousand more from her had borne.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Would that of her Orlando were possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of all women that are above ground!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For one and all are ingrates at the best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor is in all an ounce of goodness found.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But it is meet I let my hearer rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere my strained chords return a faltering sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that he may less tedious deem the rhyme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Defer my story till another time.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
