<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Ariodantes has, a worthy meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his loved bride, the fief of Albany.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meantime Rogero, on the flying steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arrives in false Alcina's empery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There from a myrtle-tree her every deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A human myrtle hears, and treachery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thence would go; but they who first withdrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him from one strife, engage him in a new.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Wretched that evil man who lives in trust</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His secret sin is safe in his possession!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since, if nought else, the air, the very dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In which the crime is buried, makes confession,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oftentimes his guilt compels the unjust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though sometime unarraigned in worldly session,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be his own accuser, and bewray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So God has willed, deeds hidden from the day.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>The unhappy Polinesso hopes had nursed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wholly his secret treason to conceal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By taking off Dalinda, who was versed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this, and only could the fact reveal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And adding thus a second to his first</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Offence, but hurried on the dread appeal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which haply he had stunned, at least deferred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he to self-destruction blindly spurred.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>And forfeited estate, and life, and love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of friends at once, and honour, which was more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavalier unknown, I said above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long of the king and court entreated sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length the covering helmet did remove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And showed a visage often seen before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cherished face of Ariodantes true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of late lamented weeping Scotland through;</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>Ariodantes, whom with tearful eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His brother and Geneura wept as dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And king, and people, and nobility:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such light his goodness and his valour shed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pilgrim therefore might appear to lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In what he of the missing warrior said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet was it true that from a headland, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had seen him plunge into the foaming sea.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>But, as it oft befalls despairing wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who grisly Death desires till he appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But loathes what he had sought, on nearer sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So painful seems the cruel pass and drear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus, in the sea engulphed, the wretched knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Repentant of his deed, was touched with fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, matchless both for spirit and for hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beat back the billows, and returned to land.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>And, now despising, as of folly bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fond desire which did to death impell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence, soaked and dripping wet, his way did tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And halted at a hermit's humble cell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And housed within the holy father's shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There secretly awhile designed to dwell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till to his ears by rumour should be voiced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If his Geneura sorrowed or rejoiced.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>At first he heard that, through excess of woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The miserable damsel well-nigh died:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For so abroad the doleful tidings go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twas talked of in the island, far and wide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far other proof than that deceitful show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to his cruel grief he thought he spied!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next against the fair Geneura heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lurcanio to her sire his charge preferred:</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor for his brother felt less enmity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than was the love he lately bore the maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he too foul, and full of cruelty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteemed the deed, although for him essayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, hearing after, in her jeopardy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That none appeared to lend the damsel aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because so puissant was Lurcanio's might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All dreaded an encounter with the knight,</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>And that who well the youthful champion knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believed he was so wary and discreet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, had what he related been untrue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He never would have risqued so rash a feat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— For this the greater part the fight eschew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fearing in wrongful cause the knight to meet —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ariodantes (long his doubts are weighed)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will meet his brother in Geneura's aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>"Alas! (he said) I cannot bear to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus by my cause the royal damsel die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My death too bitter and too dread would be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did I, before my own, her death descry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For still my lady, my divinity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She is; — the light and comfort of my eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her, right or wrong, I cannot choose but shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for her safety perish in the field.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>"I know I choose the wrong, and be it so!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the cause shall die: nor this would move;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that, alas! my death, as well I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will such a lovely dame's destruction prove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To death I with one only comfort go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, if her Polinesso bears her love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her will manifestly be displayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hitherto he moves not in her aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And me, so wronged by her, the maid shall view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encounter death in her defence; and he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My brother, who such flames of discord blew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall pay the debt of vengeance due to me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For well I ween to make Lurcanio rue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Informed of the event) his cruelty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who will have thought to venge me with his brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And will have slain me with his very hand."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He, having this concluded in his thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made new provision of arms, steed, and shield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Black was the vest and buckler which he bought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where green and yellow striped the sable field:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By hazard found, with him a squire he brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A stranger in that country; and, concealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As is already told) the unhappy knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against his brother came, prepared for fight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>And yielding to his natural inclination,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at the suit of all his court beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mostly at Rinaldo's instigation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assigned the youth the damsel as his bride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albany's duchy, now in sequestration,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Late Polinesso's, who in duel died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could not be forfeited in happier hour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since this the monarch made his daughter's dower.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo for Dalinda mercy won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who from her fault's due punishment went free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, satiate of the world, (and this to shun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel so had vowed) to God will flee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence, in Denmark's land, to live a nun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Straight from her native Scotland sailed the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But it is time Rogero to pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who on his courser posts the welkin through.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Although Rogero is of constant mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not from his cheek the wonted hues depart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I ween that faster than a leaf i' the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fluttered within his breast the stripling's heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All Europe's region he had left behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his swift course; and, issuing in that part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Passed by a mighty space, the southern sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where great Alcides fixed the sailor's bound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>That hippogryph, huge fowl, and strange to sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bears off the warrior with such rapid wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would have distanced, in his airy flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thunder bearing bird of Aether's king:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor other living creature soars such height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him in his mighty swiftness equalling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I scarce believe that bolt, or lightning flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or darts more swiftly from the parted skies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>When the huge bird his pinions long had plied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a straight line, without one stoop or bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, tired of air, with sweeping wheel and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Began upon an island to descend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like that fair region, whither, long unspied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of him, her wayward mood did long offend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whilom in vain, through strange and secret sluice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Passed under sea the Virgin Arethuse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>A more delightful place, wherever hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the whole air, Rogero had not found:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, had he ranged the universal world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would not have seen a lovelier in his round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than that, where, wheeling wide, the courser furled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His spreading wings, and lighted on the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Mid cultivated plain, delicious hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moist meadow, shady bank, and crystal rill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Small thickets, with the scented laurel gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cedar, and orange, full of fruit and flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Myrtle and palm, with interwoven spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pleached in mixed modes, all lovely, form a bower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, breaking with their shade the scorching ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make a cool shelter from the noontide hour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And nightingales among those branches wing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their flight, and safely amorous descants sing.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Amid red roses and white lilies there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the soft breezes freshen as they fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Secure the cony haunts, and timid hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stag, with branching forehead broad and high.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These, fearless of the hunter's dart or snare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feed at their ease, or ruminating lie:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While, swarming in those wilds, from tuft or steep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dun deer or nimble goat, disporting, leap.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When the hyppogryph above the island hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had approached so nigh that landscape fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, if his rider from the saddle sprung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He might the leap with little danger dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero lit the grass and flowers among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But held him, lest he should remount the air:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to a myrtle, nigh the rolling brine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made fast, between a bay-tree and a pine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And there, close-by where rose a bubbling fount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Begirt the fertile palm and cedar-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He drops the shield, the helmet from his front</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uplifts, and, either hand from gauntlet free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now turning to the beach, and now the mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Catches the gales which blow from hill or sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with a joyous murmur, lightly stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lofty top of beech, or feathery fir:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>And, now, to bathe his burning lips he strains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now dabbles in the crystal wave, to chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The scorching heat which rages in his veins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Caught from the heavy corslet's burning case.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor is it marvel if the burden pains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No ramble his in square or market-place!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Three thousand miles, without repose, he went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still, at speed, in ponderous armour pent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile the courser by the myrtle's side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he left stabled in the cool retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Started at something in the wood descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scared by I know not what; and in his heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So made the myrtle shake where he was tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He brought a shower of leaves about his feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He made the myrtle shake and foliage fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, struggling, could not loose himself withal.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>As in a stick to feed the chimney rent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where scanty pith ill fills the narrow sheath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vapour, in its little channel pent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Struggles, tormented by the fire beneath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, till its prisoned fury find a vent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is heard to hiss and bubble, sing and seethe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So the offended myrtle inly pined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Groaned, murmured, and at last unclosed its rind:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And hence a clear, intelligible speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus issued, with a melancholy sound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"If, as thy cheer and gentle presence teach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou courteous art and good, his reign unbound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Release me from this monster, I beseech:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Griefs of my own inflict sufficient wound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor need I, compassed with such ills about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Other new pain to plague me from without."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>At the first sound, Rogero turns to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence came the voice, and, in unused surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stands, when he finds it issues from the tree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And swiftly to remove the courser hies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, with a face suffused with crimson, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In answer to the groaning myrtle, cries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Pardon! and, whatsoe'er thou art, be good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spirit of man, or goddess of the wood!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Unweeting of the wonderous prodigy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of spirit, pent beneath the knotty rind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To your fair leaf and living body I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have done this scathe and outrage undesigned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not the less for that, to me reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What art thou, who, in rugged case confined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dost live and speak? And so may never hail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From angry heaven your gentle boughs assail!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"And if I now or ever the despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I did thee can repair, or aid impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, by that lady dear, my promise plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in her keeping has my better part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To strive with word and deed, till thou requite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The service done with praise and grateful heart."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero said; and, as he closed his suit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That gentle myrtle shook from top to root.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Next drops were seen to stand upon the bark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As juice is sweated by the sapling-spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">New-severed, when it yields to flame and spark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sometime in vain kept back and held at bay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next the voice began: "My story dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forced by thy courteous deed, I shall display; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What once I was — by whom, through magic lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Changed to a myrtle on the pleasant shore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"A peer of France, Astolpho was my name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whilom a paladin, sore feared in fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cousin I was to two of boundless fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando and Rinaldo. I by right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Looked to all England's crown; my lawful claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After my royal father, Otho hight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More dames than one my beauty served to warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in conclusion wrought my single harm.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Returning from those isles, whose eastern side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The billows of the Indian ocean beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where good Rinaldo and more knights beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With me were pent in dark and hollow seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence, rescued by illustrious Brava's pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose prowess freed us from that dark retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Westward I fared along the sandy shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On which the stormy north his fury pours.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Pursuing thus our rugged journey, we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came (such our evil doom) upon the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where stood a mansion seated by the sea:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Puissant Alcina owned the house and land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We found her, where, without her dwelling, she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had taken on the beach her lonely stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And though nor hook nor sweeping net she bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What fish she willed, at pleasure drew to shore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Thither swift dolphins gambol, inly stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And open-mouthed the cumbrous tunnies leap;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither the seal or porpus' wallowing herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Troop at her bidding, roused from lazy sleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raven-fish, salmon, salpouth, at her word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mullet hurry through the briny deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With monstrous backs above the water, sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ork, physeter, sea-serpent, shark, and whale.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"There we behold a mighty whale, of size</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hugest yet in any water seen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than eleven paces, to our eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His back appears above the surface green:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (for still firm and motionless he lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such the distance his two ends between)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We all are cheated by the floating pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And idly take the monster for an isle.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Alcina made the ready fish obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By simple words and by mere magic lore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Born with Morgana — but I cannot say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If at one birth, or after or before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as seen, my aspect pleased the fay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who showed it in the countenance she wore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then wrought with art, and compassed her intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To part me from the friends with whom I went.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"She came towards us with a cheerful face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With graceful gestures, and a courteous air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said: 'So you my lodging please to grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir cavalier, and will with me repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You shall behold the wonders of my chace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And note the different sorts of fish I snare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shaggy or smooth, or clad in scales of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more in number than the stars of night:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>" 'And would you hear a mermaid sing so sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the rude sea grows civil at her song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wont at this hour her music to repeat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(With that she showed the monster huge and long</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— I said it seemed an island — as her seat)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pass with me where she sings the shoals among.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, that was always wilful, at her wish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I now lament my rashness, climb the fish.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>"To Dudon and Rinaldo's signal blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I go, who warn me to misdoubt the fay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With laughing face Alcina mounts behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving the other two beside the bay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The obedient fish performs the task assigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And through the yielding water works his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Repentant of my deed, I curse the snare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too far from land my folly to repair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>"To aid me swam Mount Alban's cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was nigh drowned amid the waves that rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For a south-wind sprang up that, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Covered with sudden darkness seas and skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not after what befel the peer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while Alcina to console me tries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all that day, and night which followed, me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Detained upon that monster in mid-sea,</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Till to this isle we drifted with the morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of which Alcina keeps a mighty share;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By that usurper from a sister torn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was her father's universal heir:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that she only was in wedlock born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for those other two false sisters were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So well-instructed in the story, said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One who rehearsed the tale) in incest bred.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"As these are practised in iniquity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And full of every vice and evil art;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So she, who ever lives in chastity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wisely on better things has set her heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence, leagued against her, in conspiracy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those others are, to drive her from her part:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more than once their armies have o'errun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her realm, and towns above a hundred won.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Nor at this hour a single span of ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would Logistilla (such her name) command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that a mountain here, and there a sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Protects the remnant from the invading band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Tis thus the mountain and the river bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">England, and part it from the Scottish land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet will the sisters give their foe no rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till of her scanty remnant dispossest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Because in wickedness and vice were bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pair, as chaste and good they loath the dame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, to return to what I lately said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to relate how I a plant became;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me, full of love, the kind Alcina fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With full delights; nor I a weaker flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For her, within my burning heart did bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beholding her so courteous and so fair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Clasped in her dainty limbs, and lapt in pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I weened that I each separate good had won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to mankind is dealt in different measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Little or more to some, and much to none.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I evermore contemplated my treasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor France nor aught beside I thought upon:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In her my every fancy, every hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Centered and ended as their common scope.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"By her I was as much beloved, or more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor did Alcina now for other care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She left her every lover; for before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Others, in truth, the fairy's love did share:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I was her close adviser evermore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And served by her, where they commanded were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With me she counselled, and to me referred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, night nor day, to other spake a word.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Why touch my wounds, to aggravate my ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that, alas! without the hope of cure?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why thus the good possessed remember still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid the cruel penance I endure?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When kindest I believed Alcina's will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fondly deemed my happiness secure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From me the heart she gave, the fay withdrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yielded all her soul to love more new.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>"Late I discerned her light and fickle bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still loving and unloving at a heat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two months, I reigned not more, no sooner spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than a new paramour assumed my seat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And me, with scorn, she doomed to banishment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From her fair grace cast out. 'Tis then I weet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I share a thousand lovers' fate, whom she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had to like pass reduced, all wrongfully.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>"And these, because they should not scatter bruits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roaming the world, of her lascivious ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, up and down the fruitful soil, transmutes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To olive, palm, or cedar, firs or bays.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These, as you see me changed, Alcina roots;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While this transformed into a monster strays;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another melts into a liquid rill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As suits that haughty fairy's wanton will.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Thou, too, that to this fatal isle art led</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By way unwonted and till now unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That some possessor of the fairy's bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May be for thee transformed to wave or stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou shalt, with more than mortal pleasures fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have from Alcina seigniory and throne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But shalt be sure to join the common flock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Transformed to beast or fountain, plant or rock.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"I willingly to thee this truth impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that I hope with profit to advise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet 'twill be better, that informed, in part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of her false ways, she harm not by surprise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perhaps, as faces differ, and in art</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wit of man an equal difference lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou may'st some remedy perchance apply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the ill, which thousand others could not fly."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The good Rogero, who from Fame had learned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he was cousin to the dame he wooed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lamented much the sad Astolpho, turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From his true form, to barren plant and rude:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for her love, for whom so sore he burned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would gladly serve the stripling if he cou'd:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, witless how to give the wished relief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might but console the unhappy warrior's grief.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>As best he could, he strove to soothe his pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then asked him, if to Logistil's retreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were passage, whether over hill or plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he might so eschew Alcina's seat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— `There was a way', the myrtle said again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— `But rough with stones, and rugged to the feet —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he, some little further to the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would scale the Alpine mountain's very height:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>`But that he must not think he shall pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The intended journey far; since by the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will encounter with a frequent crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fierce, who serve as rampart to the fay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That block the road against the stranger, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would break her bounds, and the deserter stay.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero thanked the tree for all, and taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Departed thence with full instructions fraught.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The courser from the myrtle he untied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the bridle led behind him still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would he, as before, the horse bestride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest he should bear him off against his will:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He mused this while how safely he might find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A passage to the land of Logistil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Firm in his purpose every nerve to strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest empire over him Alcina gain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He to remount the steed, and through the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To spur him to a new career again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now thought; but doubted next, in fear to fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worse on the courser, restive to the rein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"No, I will win by force the mountain stair,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero said; (but the resolve was vain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor by the beach two miles his way pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere he Alcina's lovely city viewed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>A lofty wall at distance meets his eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which girds a spacious town within its bound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seems as if its summit touched the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all appears like gold from top to ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here some one says it is but alchemy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— And haply his opinion is unsound —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And haply he more wittily divines:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For me, I deem it gold because it shines.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>When he was nigh the city-walls, so bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The world has not their equal, he the straight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And spacious way deserts, the way which dight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Across the plain, conducted to the gate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by that safer road upon the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strains now against the mountain; but, in wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encounters soon the crowd of evil foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who furiously the Child's advance oppose.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Was never yet beheld a stranger band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of mien more hideous, or more monstrous shape.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Formed downwards from neck like men, he scanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some with the head of cat, and some of ape;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hoof of goat that other stamped the sand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While some seemed centaurs, quick in fight and rape;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Naked, or mantled in outlandish skin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These doting sires, those striplings bold in sin.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>This gallops on a horse without a bit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This backs the sluggish ass, or bullock slow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These mounted on the croup of centaur sit:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those perched on eagle, crane, or estridge, go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some male, some female, some hermaphrodit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These drain the cup and those the bungle blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One bore a corded ladder, one a book;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One a dull file, or bar of iron shook.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The captain of this crew, which blocked the road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared, with monstrous paunch and bloated face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who a slow tortoise for a horse bestrode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That passing sluggishly with him did pace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Down looked, some here, some there, sustained the load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he was drunk, and kept him in his place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some wipe his brows and chin from sweat which ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And others with their vests his visage fan.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>One, with a human shape and feet, his crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fashioned like hound, in neck and ears and head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bayed at the gallant Child with angry quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To turn him to the city whence he fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"That will I never, while of strength possessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To brandish this," the good Rogero said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that his trenchant faulchion he displayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pointed at him full the naked blade.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>That monster would have smote him with a spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But swiftly at his foe Rogero sprung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thrust at his paunch, and drove his faulchion sheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through his pierced back a palm; his buckler flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before him, and next sallied there and here:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all too numerous was the wicked throng.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now grappled from behind, now punched before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He stands, and plies the crowd with warfare sore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>One to the teeth, another to the breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that foul race he cleft; since no one steeled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In mail, his brows with covering helmet dressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or fought, secured by corslet or by shield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet is he so upon all quarters pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it would need the Child, to clear the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to keep off the wicked crew which swarms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than Briareus' hundred hands and arms.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>If he had thought the magic shield to show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(I speak of that the necromancer bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which dazed the sight of the astonished foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left at his saddle by the wizard Moor)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hideous band, in sudden overthrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blinded by this, had sunk the knight before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But haply he despised such mean as vile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would prevail by valour, not by guile.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>This as it may: the Child would meet his fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere by so vile a band be prisoner led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, lo! forth issuing from the city's gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose wall appeared like shining gold I said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two youthful dames, not born in low estate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If measured by their mien and garb, nor bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By swain, in early wants and troubles versed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But amid princely joys in palace nursed!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>On unicorn was seated either fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A beast than spotless ermine yet more white;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So lovely were the damsels, and so rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their garb, and with such graceful fashion dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he who closely viewed the youthful pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would need a surer sense than mortal sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To judge between the two. With such a mien</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embodied Grace and Beauty would be seen.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Into the mead rode this and the other dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the foul crew opposed the Child's retreat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rabble scattered as the ladies came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with extended hand the warrior greet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, with a kindling visage, red with shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thanked the two damsels for their gentle feat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was content upon their will to wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With them returning to that golden gate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Above, a cornice round the gateway goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Somedeal projecting from the colonnade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In which is not a single part but glows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With rarest gems of India overlaid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Propp'd at four points, the portal did repose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On columns of one solid diamond made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether what met the eye was false or true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was never sight more fair or glad to view.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Upon the sill and through the columns there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ran young and wanton girls, in frolic sport;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who haply yet would have appeared more fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had they observed a woman's fitting port.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All are arrayed in green, and garlands wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the fresh leaf. Him these in courteous sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With many proffers and fair mien entice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And welcome to this opening Paradise:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>For so with reason I this place may call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, it is my belief, that Love had birth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where life is spent in festive game and ball,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still the passing moments fleet in mirth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here hoary-headed Thought ne'er comes at all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor finds a place in any bosom. Dearth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet Discomfort, never enter here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Plenty fills her horn throughout the year.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Here, where with jovial and unclouded brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Glad April seems to wear a constant smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Troop boys and damsels: One, whose fountains flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the green margin sings in dulcet style;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Others, the hill or tufted tree below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In dance, or no mean sport the hours beguile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While this, who shuns the revellers' noisy cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tells his love sorrows in his comrade's ear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Above the laurel and pine-tree's height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the tall beech and shaggy fir-tree's spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sport little loves, with desultory flight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These, at their conquests made, rejoiced and gay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These, with the well-directed shaft, take sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At hearts, and those spread nets to catch their prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One wets his arrows in the brook which winds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one on whirling stone the weapon grinds.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>To good Rogero here was brought a steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Puissant and nimble, all of sorel hue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was caparisoned with costly weed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Broidered with gold, and jewels bright to view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That other winged horse, which, at his need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Obedient to the Moorish wizard flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The friendly damsels to a youth consigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who led him at a slower pace behind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>That kindly pair who, by the wicked band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Offended fate, had saved the youthful knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wicked crew, that did the Child withstand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he the road had taken on his right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaimed, "Fair sir, your works already scanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By us, who are instructed of your might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embolden us, in our behalf, to pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You will the prowess of your arm assay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"We soon shall reach a bottom which divides</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The plain into two parts: A cruel dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A bridge maintains, which there a stream bestrides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eriphila the savage beldam's name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who cheats, and robs, and scathes, whoever rides</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the other shore, a giantess in frame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who has long poisonous teeth her prey to tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scratches with her talons like a bear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Besides that she infests the public way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which else were free; she often ranging through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All this fair garden, puts in disarray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This thing or that. Of the assassin crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That people who without the portal gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lately with brutal rage assaulted you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many her sons, the whole her followers call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As greedy and inhospitable all."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>"For you not only her I would assail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But do a hundred battles, well content:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then of my person, where it may avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dispose (Rogero said) to you intent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Silver and land to conquer, plate or mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I swear not, I, in warlike cuirass pent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to afford my aid to others due;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, most of all, to beauteous dames like you."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Their grateful thanks the ladies, worthily</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bestowed on such a valiant champion, paid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They talking thus the bridge and river see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at her post the haughty dame arraid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Sapphire and emerald decked the panoply)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In arms of gold: but I awhile delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till other strain the issue of the fray.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
