<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XLIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-44" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Rinaldo his sister to the Child hath plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to Marseilles is with the warrior gone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having crimsoned wide the field in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein arrives King Otho’s valiant son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Paris thence; where to that squadron bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is mighty grace and wonderous honour done.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Child departs, resolved on Leo’s slaughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom Duke Aymon had betrothed his daughter.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>In poor abode, ’mid paltry walls and bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid discomforts and calamities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Often in friendship heart united are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better than under roof of lordly guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or in some royal court, beset with snare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid envious wealth, and ease, and luxuries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where charity is spent on every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor friendship, unless counterfeit, is spied.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hence it ensues that peace and pact between</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Princes and peers are of such short-lived wear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To-day king, pope, and emperor leagued are seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the marrow deadly foemen are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because such is not as their outward mien</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heart, the spirit, that those sovereigns bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since, wholly careless as to right or wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to their profit look the faithless throng.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Though little prone to friendship is that sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because with those she loveth not to dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, be their talk in earnest or in sport,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Speak not, except some cozening tale to tell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet if together in some poor resort</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They prisoned are by Fortune false and fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What friendship is they speedily discern;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though years had past, and this was yet to learn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In his retreat that ancient eremite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could bind his inmates with a faster noose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in true love more firmly them unite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than other could in domes where courtiers use;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so enduring was the knot and tight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That nothing short of death the tie could loose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Benignant all the hermit found that crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whiter at heart than swans in outward hue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All kind he found them, and of courteous lore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Untainted with iniquity, in wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of them I painted, and who nevermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Go forth, unless concealed in some disguise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of injuries among them done before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All memory, by those comrades buried lies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor could they better love, if from one womb</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from one seed that warlike band had come.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo more than all that lordly train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero graced and lovingly caressed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well because be on the listed plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had proved the peer so strong in martial gest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that he was more courteous and humane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than any knight that e’er laid lance in rest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But much more; that to him on many a ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By mighty obligation was he bound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The fearful risk by Richardetto run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He knew, and how Rogero him bested;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time the Spanish monarch’s hest was done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with his daughter he was seized in bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how he had delivered either son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of good Duke Buovo (as erewhile was said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Bertolagi of Maganza’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His evil followers, and the paynim band.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To honour and to hold Rogero dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, Sir Rinaldo thought, this debt constrained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that he could not so have done whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warlike lord was sorely grieved and pained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When one for Afric’s monarch couched the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one the cause of royal Charles maintained:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now he Rogero for a Christian knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What could not then be done he now would do.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Welcome, with endless proffers, on his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And honour he to good Rogero paid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prudent sire that in such kindness spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An opening made for more, the pass assayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“And nothing else remains,” that hermit cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Nor will, I trust, my counsel be gainsaid)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that, conjoined by friendship, you shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet faster coupled by affinity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That from the two bright progenies, which none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will equal in illustrious blood below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A race may spring, that brighter than the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will shine, wherever that bright sun may glow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And which, when years and ages will have run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their course, will yet endure and fairer show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While in their orbits burn the heavenly fires:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So me, for your instruction, God inspires.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And his discourse pursuing still, the seer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So spake, he moves Rinaldo by his rede</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To give his sister to the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit with either small entreaties need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together with Orlando, Olivier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The counsel lauds, and would that union speed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Charles and Aymon will, he hopes, approve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And France will welcome wide their wedded love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake together peer and paladine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor knew that Aymon, with King Charles’ consent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unto the Grecian emperor Constantine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To give his gentle daughter had intent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for young Leo, of his lofty line</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heir and hope, to crave the maid had sent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such warmth the praises of her worth inspired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With love of her unseen was Leo fired.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To him hath Aymon answered; “he, alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cannot conclude thereon in other sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he first hath spoken with his son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, absent then from Charles’s court;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with winged haste, he deems, will thither run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And joy in kinsman of such high report;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But from the high regard he bears his heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can nought resolve till thither he repair.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now good Rinaldo, of his father wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the imperial practice knowing nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Promised his beauteous sister as a bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his own, as well as Roland’s thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the others, harboured in that cell beside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But most of all on him the hermit wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by such marriage, ’twas the peer’s belief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He could not choose but pleasure Clermont’s chief.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That day and night, and of the following day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Great part, with that sage monk the warriors spent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarce mindful that the crew their coming stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit the wind blew fair for their intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But these, impatient at their long delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than one message to the warriors sent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to return those barons urged so sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Parforce they parted from the hermit hoar.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Child who, so long banished, had not stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the lone rock, whereon the waters roared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His farewell to that holy master made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who taught him the true faith: anew with sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando girt his side, and with the blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Frontino and martial Hector’s arms restored;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As knowing horse and arms were his whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well as out of kindness to the peer;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, though the enchanted sword with better right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have been worn by good Anglantes’ chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who from the fearful garden by his might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had won the blade<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-535" id="noteref-535" epub:type="noteref">535</a> with mickle toil and grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than by Rogero, who that faulchion bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Received with good Frontino, from the thief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He willingly thereof, as with the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as asked, the warrior repossest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The hermit blessings on the band implores:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They to their bark in fine return; their sails</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give to the winds, and to the waves their oars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such clear skies they have and gentle gales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor vow nor prayer the patron makes; and moors</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His pinnace in the haven of Marseilles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There, safely harboured, let the chiefs remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till I conduct Astolpho to that train.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When of that bloody, dear-brought victory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The scarcely joyful tale Astolpho knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, seeing evermore fair France would be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Secure from mischief from the Moorish crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Homeward to send the king of Aethiopy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Devised, together with his army, through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sandy desert, by the self-same track,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through which he led them to Biserta’s sack.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Erewhile restored, in Afric waters ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Dudon’s ships which did the paynims rout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose prows (new miracle!) and poop, and side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as all their sable crews are out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are changed anew to leaves; which far and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raised by a sudden breeze, are blown about;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scattered in mid-air, like such light gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Go eddying with the wind, and disappear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Home, horse and foot, the Nubian host arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By squadrons, all, from wasted Afric go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to their king, first, thanks Astolpho paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said, he an eternal debt should owe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that he had in person given him aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all his might and main against the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The skins Astolpho gave them, which confined</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The turbid and tempestuous southern wind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I say, enclosed in skins that wind he gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which in such fury blows at noon, on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I moves the shifting plain in many a wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fills the eddying sand the troubled sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To carry with them, and from scathe to save</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their squadrons, lest the dusty whirlwind fly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bids them, when arrived at home, unnoose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bladder’s vent, and let their prisoners loose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When they have lofty Atlas’ passes won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The horses that the Nubian riders bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turpin relates, are changed at once to stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that the steeds return to what they were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But it is time the Duke to France was gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who having thus provided, in his care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the main places in the Moorish land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made the hippogryph anew his wings expand;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He reached Sardinia at one flight and shear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Corsica from Sardinia; and then o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The foaming sea his venturous course did steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inclining somewhat left the griffin’s soar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the sea-marshes last his light career</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He stopt, on rich Provence’s pleasant shore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where to the hyppogryph by him is done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What was erewhile enjoined by sainted John.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To him the charge did sainted John commit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When to Provence by that winged courser borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him nevermore with saddle or with bit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To gall, but let him to his lair return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already had the planet, whither flit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Things lost on earth, of sound deprived his horn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this not only hoarse but mute remained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as the holy place Astolpho gained.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thence to Marseilles he came; and came the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando, and Rinaldo, and Olivier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived therein, upon their homeward way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With good Sobrino, and the better peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero: not so triumphs that array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Touched by the death of him, their comrade dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As they for such a glorious victory won</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—But for that sad disaster⁠—would have done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of the kings slain upon the paynim part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The news from Sicily to Charles were blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobrino’s fate, and death of Brandimart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor less of good Rogero had been shown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charles stood with jocund fate and gladsome heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rejoicing he had from his shoulders thrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The intolerable load whereof the weight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will for long time prevent his standing straight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To honour those fair pillars that sustain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The state⁠—the holy empire’s corner-stone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The nobles of his kingdom Charlemagne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dispatched, to meet the knights, as far as Saône;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from his city with his worthiest train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King, duke, and her, the partner of his throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Issued amid a fair and gorgeous band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of noble damsels, upon either hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The emperor Charles with bright and cheerful brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lords, paladins and people, kinsmen, friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair love to Roland and the others show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mongrana and Clermont’s cry the welkin rends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No sooner, mid that kind and festal show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The interchange of fond embracements ends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Roland and his friends Rogero bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mid those lords present him to the king;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And him Rogero of Risa’s son declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vouch in valour as his father’s peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Witnesses of his worth our squadrons are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They best can tell his prowess with the spear.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile, the noble and the lovely pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa and gentle Bradamant appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This runs to fold Rogero to her heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More coy, that other stands somedeal apart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The emperor bids Rogero mount again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who from his horse had lit, in reverence due;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, side by side, with him his courser rein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor aught omits that monarch which may do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior honour, mid his martial train:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How the true faith he had embraced he knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all instructed by that band before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When first those paladins set foot ashore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With pomp triumphal and with festive cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The troop returns within the city-walls:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With leaves and garlands green the streets appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tapestried all about with gorgeous palls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of herbs and flowers a mingled rain, where’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They wend, upon the conquering squadron falls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which with full hands from stand and window throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Damsel and dame upon the knights below.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At every turn, in various places are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of sudden structure arch and trophy high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereon Biserta’s sack is painted fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ruin and fire, and feat of chivalry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scaffolds, upraised for different sports elsewhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And merrimake and stage-play meet the eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, writ with truth, above, below, between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To <b>The Empire’s Saviours</b>, everywhere is seen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With sound of shrilling pipe and trumpet proud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other festive music, laughter light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Applause and favour of the following crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which scarce found room, begirt with dames and knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mighty emperor, mid those greetings loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the royal palace did alight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where many days he feasted high in hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His lords, mid tourney, mummery, mask and ball.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His son to Aymon on a day made known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His sister he would make Rogero’s bride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, before Olivier and Milo’s son,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-536" id="noteref-536" epub:type="noteref">536</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her to the Child by promise had affied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who think with him that kindred is there none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith to league themselves, on any side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For valour or nobility of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better than his; nay, none so passing good.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Duke Aymon heard his heir with some disdain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, without concert with him, and alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He dared to plight his daughter, whom he fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would marry to the Grecian emperor’s son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not to him that has no kingly reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay has not ought that he can call his own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And should not know, how little nobleness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is valued without wealth; how virtue less.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Beatrice, his wife, with more despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arraigns her son, and calls him arrogant;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And moves each open way and hidden sleight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To break Rogero’s match with Bradamant;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved to tax her every means and might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make her empress of the wide Levant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Firm in his purpose is Montalban’s lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor will in ought forego his plighted word.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beatrice who believes the highminded fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is at her hest, exhorts her to reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Rather than she will be constrained to pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a poor knight, she is resolved to die;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, if this wrong she from Rinaldo bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will she regard her with a mother’s eye:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let her refuse and keep her stedfast course;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For her free will Rinaldo cannot force.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Silent stands mournful Bradamant, nor dares</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile her lady-mother’s speech gainsay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom such reverence, and respect, she bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She thinks no choice is left but to obey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet a foul fault it in her eyes appears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If what she will not do, she falsely say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She will not, for she cannot; since above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All guidance, great or small, is mighty Love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Deny she dared not, nor yet seem content;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, sighed and spake not; but⁠—when uncontrolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She could⁠—she gave her secret sorrow vent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While from her eyes the tears like billows rolled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A portion of the pains that her torment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflicting on her breast and locks of gold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this she beat, and those uptore and brake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus she made lament, and thus she spake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah! shall I will what she wills <em>not</em>, by right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More sovereign mistress of my will than I?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hers shall I hold so cheaply, so to slight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mother’s will, my own to satisfy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! what blemish is so foul to sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In damsel? What so ill, as to affy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Myself to husband, reckless of <em>her</em> will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which ’tis my duty ever to fulfil?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wo worth the while! and shall I then to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By filial love be forced to be untrue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O my Rogero, and surrender me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a new hope, a new love, and a new</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desire; or rather from those ties break free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From all good children to good parents due;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Observance, reverence cast aside; and measure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My duty by my happiness, my pleasure?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I know, alas! what I should do; I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That which a duteous daughter doth behove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know; but what avails it, if not so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My reason moves me as my senses move;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she retires before a stronger foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can I of myself dispose, for Love;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor think how to dispose; so strict his sway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, saving as he dictates, do and say?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Aymon and Beatrice’s child, the slave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Love am I; ah! miserable me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I from my parents am in hope to have</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pardon and pity, if in fault I be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, if I anger Love, whose prayer shall save</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me from his fury, till one only plea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of mine the Godhead shall vouchsafe to hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor doom me dead as soon as I appear?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alas! with long and obstinate pursuit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To our faith to draw Rogero have I wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And finally have drawn; but with what boot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If my fair deed for other’s good be wrought?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So yearly by the bee, whose labour’s fruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is lost for her, is hive with honey fraught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I will die ere I the Child forsake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other husband than Rogero take.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If I shall not obey my father’s hest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor mothers, I my brother’s shall obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of greater wisdom far than them possest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Time hath made that warrior’s wit his prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what <em>he</em> wills by Roland is profest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, one and the other, on my side are they;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A pair more feared and honoured far and wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than all the members of my house beside.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If them the flower of Clermont’s noble tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The glory and the splendor all account;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If all believe our other chivalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They, more than head o’ertops the foot, surmount;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why would I Aymon should dispose of me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than good Rinaldo and the Count?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I should not; so much less, as not affied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Leo, and Rogero’s promised bride.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If cruel thoughts the afflicted maid torment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero’s mind enjoys not more repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For albeit those sad tidings have not vent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet in the city, he the secret knows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He o’er his humble fortunes makes lament</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which his enjoying such a good oppose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As unendowed with riches or with reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dispensed so widely to a worthless train.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of other goods which Nature’s hand supplies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or which acquired by man’s own study are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He such a portion in himself espies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such and so large was never other’s share:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that, no beauty with his beauty vies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that, resistance to his might is rare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The palm by none from him can challenged be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In regal splendour, magnanimity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But they at whose disposal honours lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who give at will, and take away renown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vulgar herd; and from the vulgar I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Except the prudent man, distinguished none;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor emperor, pope, nor king, is raised more high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than these by sceptre, mitre, or by crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor save by prudence; save by judgement, given</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to the favoured few by partial Heaven;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This vulgar (to say out what I would say)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which only honours wealth, therewith more smit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than any worldly thing beside, nor they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aught heed or aught esteem, ungraced with it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be beauty or be daring what it may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dexterity or prowess, worth, or wit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or goodness⁠—yet more vulgar stands confest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that whereof I speak than in the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rogero said; “If Aymon is disposed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An empress in his Bradamant to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let not his treaty be so quickly closed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Leo; let a year be granted me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that, meanwhile, I hope, by me deposed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall Leo with his royal father be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I, encircled with their forfeit crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall be for Aymon no unworthy son.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But if he give without delay, as said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His daughter to the son of Constantine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If to that promise no regard be paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which good Rinaldo and the paladine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His cousin, erst before the hermit made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Marquis Olivier and King Sobrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What shall I do? such grievous wrong shall I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Endure, or, rather than endure it, die?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What shall I do? her father then pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On whom for vengeance this grave outrage cries?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I heed not that the deed is hard to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or if the attempt in me is weak or wise:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But presuppose that, with his kindred crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slain by my hand that unjust elder dies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This will in nothing further my content;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay it will wholly frustrate my intent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Twas ever my intent, and still ’tis so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To have the love, not hatred, of that fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But should I Aymon slay, or bring some woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By plot or practice, on his house or heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will she not justly hold me as her foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And me, that foeman, as her lord forswear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What shall I do, endure such injury?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah! no, by Heaven! far rather I will die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay die I will not; but with better right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall Leo die, who so disturbs my joy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He and his unjust sire; less dear his flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Helen paid her paramour of Troy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet in older time that foul despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Done to Proserpina, cost such annoy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bold Pirithous, as for her I’ve lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My grief of heart shall son and father cost.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Can it be true, my life, that to forsake</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy champion for this Greek should grieve not thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And could thy father force thee him to take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though joined thy brethren with thy sire should be?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But ’tis my fear that thou would’st rather make</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accord withal with Aymon than with me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that it seemeth better in thy sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wed with Caesar than with simple wight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Can it be true that royal name should blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Imperial title, pomp and majesty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And taint my Bradamant’s egregious mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her mighty valour and her virtue high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that, as cheaper, she should cast behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her plighted faith, and from her promise fly?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor sooner she a foe to Love be made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than she no longer say, what once she said?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These things Rogero said, and more beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discoursing with himself, and in such strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oftentimes the afflicted warrior cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That stander-by o’erheard the knight complain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more than once his grief was signified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her that was the occasion of his pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who no less for his cruel woe, when known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lamented than for sorrows of her own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But most, of all the sorrows that were said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To vex Rogero, most it works her woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hear that he afflicts himself, in dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest for the Grecian prince she him forego.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence this belief, this error, from his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To drive, comfort on the knight bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The trustiest of her bower-women, one day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She to Rogero bade these words convey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Rogero, I what I was till death will be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be more faithful, if I can be more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deals Love in kindness or in scorn with me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath doubtful Fortune good or ill in store;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am a very rock of faith, by sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And winds unmoved, which round about it roar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor I have changed for calm or storm, nor I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will ever change to all eternity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sooner shall file or chisel made of lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the rough diamond various forms impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than any stroke, by fickle Fortune sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Love’s keen anger, break my constant heart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sooner return, to Alp, their fountain-head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The troubled streams that from its summit part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than e’er, for change or chances, good or nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall wander from its way my stedfast thought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“All power o’er me have I bestowed on you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero; and more than others may divine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know that to a prince whose throne is new</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was never fealty sworn more true than mine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever surer state, this wide world through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By king or keysar was possest than thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou need’st not dig a ditch nor build a tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fear lest any rob thee of that power.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For if thou hire no aids, assault is none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But what thereon shall aye be made in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor shall it be by any riches won:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So vile a price no gentle heart can gain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor by nobility, nor kingly crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That dazzle so the silly vulgar train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor beauty, puissant with the weak and light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall ever make me thee for other slight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou hast no cause, amid thy griefs, to fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My heart should ever bear new impress more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So deeply is thine image graven here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It cannot be removed: that my heart’s core</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is not of wax is proved; for Love whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote it a hundred times, not once, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He by his blows a single scale displaced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time therein his hand thine image traced.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ivory, gem, and every hard-grained stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That best resists the griding tool, may break:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, save the form it once hath taken, none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will ever from the graver’s iron take.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My heart like marble is, or thing least prone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the chisel’s trenchant edge to flake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love this may wholly splinter, ere he may</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another’s beauty in its core enlay.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Other and many words with comfort rife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And full of love and faith, she said beside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which might a thousand times have given him life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit a thousand times the knight had died:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, when most clear of the tempestuous strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In friendly port these hopes appeared to ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These hopes a foul and furious wind anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far from the sheltering land to seaward blew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In that the gentle Bradamant, who fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would do far more than she hath signified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With wonted daring armed her heart again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And boldly casting all respect aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One day stood up before King Charlemagne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, “Sire, if ever yet,” the damsel cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I have found favour in your eyes for deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Done heretofore, deny me not its meed;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And I entreat, before I claim my fee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That you to me your royal promise plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To grant my prayer; and fain would have you see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That what I shall demand is just and right.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Thy valour, damsel dear, deserves from me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The boon wherewith thy worth I should requite”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Charles answered), “and I to content thee swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though of my kingdom thou should’st claim a share.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The boon for which I to your highness sue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is not to let my parents me accord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Pursued the martial damsel) save he shew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More prowess than myself, to any lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let him contend with me in tourney, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have me, or assay me with the sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me as his wife let him that wins me, wear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let him that loses me, with other pair.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With cheerful face the emperor made reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“The entreaty was well worthy of the maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that with tranquil mind she might rely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would accord the boon for which she prayed.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This audience was not given so secretly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that the news to others were conveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which on that very day withal were told</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the ears of Beatrice and Aymon old;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who against Bradamant with fury flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And both alike, with sudden anger fraught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For plainly they perceive, that in her claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She for Rogero more than Leo wrought)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And active to prevent the damsel’s aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From being to a safe conclusion brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Privily take her from King Charles’s court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thence to Rocca Forte’s tower transport.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A castle this, which royal Charlemagne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had given to Aymon some few days before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Built between Carcasson and Perpignan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On a commanding point upon the shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved to send her eastward, there the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As in a prison kept her evermore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Willing or nilling, so must she forsake</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, and for lord must Leo take.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The martial maid of no less modest vein</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than bold and full of fire before the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit no guard on her the castellain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath set, and she is free to come or go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Observant of her sire, obeys the rein:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet prison, death, and every pain and woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To suffer is resolved that constant maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before by her Rogero be betrayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo, who thus ravished from his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By ancient Aymon’s craft his sister spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw he could no more in wedlock’s band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dispose of her, by him in vain affied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his old sire complains, and him doth brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laying his filial love and fear aside:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But little him Rinaldo’s words molest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who by the maid will do as likes him best.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rogero, bearing this and sore afraid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he shall lose his bride; and Leo take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If left alive, by force or love the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved within himself (but nothing spake)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Constantine’s heir should perish by his blade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of Augustus him a god would make.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-537" id="noteref-537" epub:type="noteref">537</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, save his hope deceived him and was vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would sire and son deprive of life and reign.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His limbs in arms, which Trojan Hector’s were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And afterwards the Tartar king’s, he steeled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bade rein Frontino, and his wonted wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exchanged, crest, surcoat and emblazoned shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On that emprize it pleased him not to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His argent eagle on its azure field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">White as a lily, was a unicorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him upon a field of crimson worn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He chose from his attendant squires the best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And willed none else should him accompany;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gave him charge, that ne’er by him exprest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero’s name in any place should be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crost Meuse and Rhine, and pricked upon his quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the Austrian countries into Hungary;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Along the right bank of the Danube made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rode an-end until he reached Belgrade.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where Save into dark Danube makes descent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the sea, increased by him, doth flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He saw the imperial ensigns spread, and tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And white pavilion, thronged with troops below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Constantine to have that town was bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anew, late won by the Bulgarian foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In person, with his son, is Constantine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all the empire’s force his host to line.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Within Belgrade, and through the neighbouring peak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even to its bottom which the waters lave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Bulgar fronts him; and both armies seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A watering-place in the intermediate Save.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A bridge across that rapid stream the Greek</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would fling; the Bulgar would defend the wave:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When thither came Rogero; and engaged</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beheld the hosts in fight, which hotly raged.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Greeks in that affray were four to one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with pontoons to bridge the stream supplied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a bold semblance through their host put on</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of crossing to the river’s further side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leo meanwhile was from the river gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With covert guile; he took a circuit wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then thither made return; his bridges placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From bank to bank, and past the stream in haste.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With many horse and foot in battle dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who nothing under twenty thousand rank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Along the river rode the Grecian knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fiercely charged his enemies in flank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The emperor, when his son appeared in sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leading his squadrons on the farther bank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uniting bridge and bark together, crost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his part the stream with all his host.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>King Vatran, chief of the Bulgarian band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wise, bold, withal a warrior, here and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laboured in vain such onset to withstand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the disorder of his host repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Leo prest him sore, and with strong hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king to earth beneath his courser bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom at the prince’s hest, for all to fierce</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is he to yield, a thousand faulchions pierce.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Bulgar host hath hitherto made head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when they see their sovereign is laid low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And everywhere that tempest wax and spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They turn their backs where erst they faced the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Child, who mid the Greeks, from whom they fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was borne along, beheld that overthrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bowned himself their battle to restore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As hating Constantine and Leo more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spurs Frontino, that in his career</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is like the wind, and passes every steed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He overtakes the troop, that in their fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fly to the mountain and desert the mead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many he stops and turns; then rests his spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as he puts his courser to his speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So fearful is his look, even Mars and Jove</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are frighted in their azure realms above.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Advanced before the others, he descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cavalier, in crimson vest, whereon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all its stalk in silk and gold was spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A pod, like millet, in embroidery done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Constantine’s nephew, by the sister’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He was, but was no less beloved than son:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He split like glass his shield and scaly rind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the long lance appeared a palm behind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He left the dead, and drew his shining blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon a squadron, whom he saw most nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now at once, and now at other made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cleft bodies, and made hearts from shoulders fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At throat, at breast and flank the warrior laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote hand, and arm, and shoulder, bust, and thigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And through that champaign ran the reeking blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to the valley foams the mountain-flood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>None that behold those strokes maintain their place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So are they all bewildered by their fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus suddenly the battle changed its face:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, catching courage from the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Bulgar squadrons rally, turn, and chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Grecian troops that fled from them whilere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lost was all order in a thought, and they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all their banners fled in disarray.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Leo Augustus on a swelling height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing his followers fly, hath taken post;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where woeful and bewildered (for to sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nothing in all the country round is lost)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from his lofty station eyes the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with his single arm destroys that host;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cannot choose, though so his prowess harms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But praise that peer and own his worth in arms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He knew full well by ensignry displayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By surcoat and by gilded panoply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That albeit to the foe he furnished aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That champion was not of his chivalry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wondering his superhuman deeds surveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now an angel seemed in him to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To scourge the Greeks from quires above descended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose sins so oft and oft had heaven offended;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, as a man of great and noble heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Where many others would have hatred sworn)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enamoured of such valour, on his part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would not desire to see him suffer scorn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For one that died, six Grecians’ death less smart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would cause that prince; and better had he borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To lose as well a portion of his reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than to behold so good a warrior slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As baby, albeit its fond mother beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And drive it forth in anger, in its fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Neither to sire nor sister makes retreat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to her arms returns with fondling cheer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So Leo, though Rogero in his heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slaughters his routed van and threats his rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cannot that champion hate; because above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His anger is the admiring prince’s love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But if young Leo loved him and admired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meseems that he an ill exchange hath made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him Rogero loathed; nor aught desired</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than to lay him lifeless with his blade:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him with his eyes he sought; for him inquired;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Leo’s fortune his desire gainsayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which with the prudence of the practised Greek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made him in vain his hated rival seek.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Leo, for fear his bands be wholly spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bids sound the assembly his Greek squadrons through:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to his father a quick courier sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To pray “that he would pass the stream anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, if the way was open, well content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might with his bargain he;” and with a few</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he collects, the Grecian cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Recrost the bridge by which he past whilere.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Into the power o’ the Bulgars many fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stalin from the hill-top to the river-side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they into their hands had fallen all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for the river’s intervening tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the bridge many drop, and drown withal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many that ne’er turned their heads aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence to a distant ford for safety made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many were dragged prisoners to Belgrade.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When done was that day’s fight, wherein (since borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To ground the Bulgar king his life did yield)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His squadrons would have suffered scathe and scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had not for them the warrior won the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior, that the snowy unicorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wore for his blazon on a crimson shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him all flock, in him with joy and glee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The winner of that glorious battle see.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some bow and some salute him; of the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some kist the warrior’s feet, and some his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Round him as closely as they could they prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And happy those are deemed, that nearest stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More those that touch him; for to touch a blest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And supernatural thing believes the band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On him with shouts that rent the heavens they cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be their king, their captain, and their guide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“As king or captain them will he command</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As liked them best,” he said, “but will not lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On sceptre or on leading-staff his hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet Belgrade will enter on that day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For first, ere farther flies young Leo’s band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they across the river make their way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him will he follow, nor forego, until</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Grecian leader he o’ertake and kill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A thousand miles and more for this alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thither measured, and for nought beside.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He saith; and from the multitude is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by a road that’s shown to him doth ride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For towards the bridge is royal Leo flown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply lest him from this the foe divide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind him pricks Rogero with such fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior calls not, nor awaits, his squire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such vantage Leo has in flight (to flee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He rather may be said than to retreat)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The passage open hath he found and free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then destroys the bridge and burns his fleet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero arrived not, till beneath the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sun was hid; nor lodging found; his beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He still pursued; and now shone forth the moon:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But town or village found the warrior none.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Because he wots not where to lodge, he goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All night, nor from his load Frontino frees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the new sun his early radiance shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A city to the left Rogero sees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there all day determines to repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As where he may his wearied courser ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he so far that livelong night had pressed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor had he drawn his bit, nor given him rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ungiardo had that city in his guard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Constantine’s liegeman, and to him right dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, since upon the Bulgars he had warred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much horse and foot had sent that emperor; here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now entered (for the entrance was not barred)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, and found such hospitable cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to fare further had no need, in trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of better or of more abundant place.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the same hostelry with him a guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was lodged that evening a Romanian knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Present what time the Child with lance in rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Succoured the Bulgars in that cruel fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who hardly had escaped his hand, sore prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scared as never yet was living wight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that he trembled still, disturbed in mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deemed the knight of the unicorn behind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He by the buckler knew as soon as spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavalier, whose arms that blazon bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him that routed the Byzantine side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By hand of whom so many slaughtered were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hurried to the palace, and applied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For audience, weighty tidings to declare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, to Ungiardo led forthwith, rehearsed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What shall by men in other strain be versed.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
