<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-34" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>In the infernal pit Astolpho hears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Lydia’s woe, by smoke well-nigh opprest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He mounts anew, and him his courser bears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the terrestrial paradise addrest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By John advised in all, to heaven he steers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of some of his lost sense here repossest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Orlando’s wasted wit as well he takes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sees the Fates spin their threads, and earthward makes.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>O fierce and hungry harpies, that on blind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And erring Italy so full have fed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom, for the scourge of ancient sins designed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply just Heaven to every board has sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Innocent children, pious mothers, pined</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hunger, die, and see their daily bread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—The orphan’s and the widow’s scanty food⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feed for a single feast that filthy brood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Too foul a fault was his, who did unclose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That cave long shut, and made the passage free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From whence that greediness, that filth arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our Italy’s infection doomed to be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then was good life extinguished, and repose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So banished, that with strife and poverty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With fear and trouble, is she still perplext,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shall for many a future year be vext:</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Till she her sons has shaken by the hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from Lethaean sloth to life restored;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaiming, “Will none imitate that pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zethes and Calais, with avenging sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rescue from claws and stench our goodly fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cleanse and glad anew the genial board.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As they king Phineus from those fowls released,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And England’s peer restored the Nubian’s feast?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>Hunting those hideous birds, that cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye scared them with the bugle’s horrid sound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till at the mountain-cave his long career</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He closed, and ran the monstrous troop to ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Attentive to the vent he held his ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in that troubled cavern heard rebound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weeping and wailing, and eternal yell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proof certain that its entrance led to hell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>Astolpho doubts if he within shall wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And see those wretched ones expelled from day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the central pit of earth descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the infernal gulfs around survey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Why should I fear, that on my horn depend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For certain succour?” (did the warrior say)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Satan and Pluto so will I confound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And drive before me their three-headed hound.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>He speedily his winged horse forsook;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Him to a sapling near at hand he ties)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavern entered next; but first he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His horn, whereon the knight in all relies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not far has he advanced before a smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Obscure and foul, offends his nose and eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ranker than pitch and sulphur is the stench,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet not thereat does good Astolpho blench.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>But as he more descends into that lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So much he finds the smoke and vapour worse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And it appears he can no further fare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay, backward must retrace his way parforce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! something (what he knows not) he in air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Espies, that seems in motion, like a corse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon whose wasted form long time had beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The winter’s rain and summers scorching heat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>In that dim cavern was so little light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Yea, well-nigh might be said that light was none⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nought sees or comprehends the English knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What wavers so, above that vapour dun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For surer proof, a stroke or two would smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his good faulchion Otho’s valiant son:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then deemed that duke it was a spirit, whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He seemed to strike amid the misty gloom.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>When him a melancholy voice addressed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Ah! without harming other, downward wend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me but too sore the sable fumes molest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which hither form the hellish fires ascend.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thereat the duke, amazed, his steps represt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the spirit cried: “So may Heaven send</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A respite from the vapours that exhale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As thou shalt deign to tell thy mournful tale!</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>“And to be known on earth shouldst thou be fain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thee will I satisfy.” To him the sprite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So sweet it seems to me, in fame again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus to return into the glorious light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My huge desire such favour to obtain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forces my words from me in my despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Constraining me to tell the things ye seek;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though ’tis annoyance and fatigue to speak.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Lydia, the child of Lydia’s king, am I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To proud estate and princely honours born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Condemned by righteous doom of God on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In murky smoke eternally to mourn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because a kindly lover’s constancy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, while I lived, repaid with spite and scorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With countless others swarm these grots below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the same sin, condemned to the same woe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Yet lower down, harsh Anaxarete</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suffers worse pain where thicker fumes arise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaven changed her flesh to stone, and here to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tormented, her afflicted spirit sties:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that unmoved she, hung in air, could see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lover vest by her barbarities.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here Daphne learns how rashly she had done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In having given Apollo such a run.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Of hosts of ingrate women in this cell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Confined, it would be tedious to recite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If, one by one, I upon these should dwell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many, their amount is infinite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twould be more tedious of the men to tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose base ingratitude due pains requite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whom, in a more dismal prison pent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smoke blinds, and everlasting fires torment.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Since to belief soft woman is more prone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He that deceives her, merits heavier pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Theseus and to Jason this is known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him that vexed of old the Latian reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him that of his brother Absalon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile provoked the pestilent disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because of Thamar; countless is the horde</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those who left a wife or wedded lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>“But, rather of my state than theirs to shew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sin which brought me hither:⁠—I was fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But so much haughtier was than fair of hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not if I ever equalled were:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor which was most excessive of the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My pride of beauty, could to thee declare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though it is certain, Pride but took its rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that rare loveliness which pleased all eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“There lived a Thracian knight, for warlike skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prowess, upon earth without a peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, voiced by many a worthy witness still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The praises of my matchless charms did hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that, of forethought and his own free will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fixed all his love on me that cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weening this wife that I, upon my part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should for his valour duly prize his heart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“He came to Lydia, and by faster tie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was fettered at my sight; and there enrolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid my royal father’s chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In mickle fame increased that baron bold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His feats of many a sort, and valour high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would make a tale too tedious to be told;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With what his boundless merit had deserved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If a more grateful master he had served.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Pamphylia, Caria, and Cilicia’s reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through him, my father brought beneath his sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who never moved a-field his martial train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when that warrior pointed out the way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, when he deemed he had deserved such gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pressed close the Lydian king, upon a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And craved me from the monarch as his wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As meed of all that booty made in strife.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Rejected of the monarch was the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was resolved his child should highly wed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not him who was a simple cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, saving valour, was with nought bested.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For on my father, bent on gain and gear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And avarice, of all vice the fountain-head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Manners and merit for as little pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the lute’s music on the lumpish ass.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Alcestes, he of whom I speak (so hight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That warrior), when he sees his suit denied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Repulsed by one, by whom he had most right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To think that he should most be gratified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Craves his discharge, and threatens he this slight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will make the Lydian monarch dear abide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Armenian, an old rival of my sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mortal for, he sought with this desire;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“And so the monarch urged, he made him rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His banner, and attack my sire; and, through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His famous feats, that Thracian cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was named the captain of the invading crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the Armenian sovereign, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All things (so said the knight) he would subdue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But claiming as his share, when all was won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My sovereign beauties for the service done.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“I ill to you the mischief could express</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alcestes did us in that war; o’erthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him four armies were, and he in less</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than one short twelvemonth left us neither town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not tower, save one, where cliffs forbade access:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas here my sire, amid those of his own</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom most he loved, took refuge, in his need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all the wealth he could collect with speed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Us in this fortilage the knight attacked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shortly to such desperation drave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That gladly would the king have made a pact,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To yield me for his consort, yea his slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With half our realm, if certain by that act</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself from every other loss to save;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Right sure he otherwise should forfeit all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, after, die in bonds, a captive thrall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Before this happened, to try every way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of remedy the Lydian king was bent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thither, where Alcestes’ army lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me, the first cause of all the mischief, sent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To yield my person to him as a prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I with intention to Alcestes went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bid him take what portion of our reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He pleased, and pacify his fierce disdain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“When of my coming that good knight does know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me he encounters pale and trembling sore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twould seem a vanquished man’s a prisoner’s brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, rather than a victor’s semblance, bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I who perceive he loves, address not now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior as I was resolved before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My vantage I descry, and shift my ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fit the state wherein that knight was found.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“To curse the warrior’s passion I begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of his crying cruelty complained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since foully by my father had he done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And me would have by violence constrained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with more grace my person would have won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor waited many days, had he maintained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His course of courtship, as begun whilere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To king and all of us so passing dear;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And if the honest suit he hoped to gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had been at first rejected by my sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas, he was somedeal of a churlish vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever yielded to a first desire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He should not therefore, restive to the rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have left his goodly task, so prompt to ire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sure, passing aye from good to better deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In little time to win the wished-for meed;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And if my father would not have been won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him I would so earnestly have prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he my lover should have made his son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay, had my royal sire my suit gainsayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him in secret that I would have done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith he should have deemed himself appaid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But since, it seemed, he other means designed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never to love him had I fixed my mind;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“And, though I sought him, at my father’s hest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pious love for him had been my guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He might be sure, not long should be possest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bliss that I, in my despite, supplied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the red blood should issue from my breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as his ill will was satisfied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On this my wretched person, which alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He so by brutal force should make his own.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“With these, and words like these, I moved the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When I such puissance in myself espied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him so contrite made, in desert drear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was never seen a saint more mortified.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before my feet the doleful cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell down, and snatched a poniard from his side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, he protested, I parforce should take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for so foul a sin my vengeance slake.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“To push my mighty victory to an end</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I scheme, when him I see in such distress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And give him hopes he may even yet pretend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I deservedly his love should bless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he his ancient error will amend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will of his realm my father repossess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And will in future time deserve my charms</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By love and service, not by force of arms.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“So promised he to do; and set me free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let me, as I came, untouched, depart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor even to kiss my lips he ventured; see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he is yoked securely, if his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love has well touched with the desire of me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he for him need feather other dart!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He seeks the Armenian, why by pact should take</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whatever spoil the conquering armies make;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And him, as best he might, would fain persuade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To leave to Lydia’s monarch his domain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon whose wasted lands his host had preyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rest content with his Armenian reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—He would not hear of this (the monarch said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With cheers with fury swolen) nor would refrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From pressing Lydia’s king with armed band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So long as he possessed a palm of land;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“And if the knight, when a vile woman sues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His purpose shift, let him the evil bear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will not, for the warrior’s asking, lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What he has hardly conquered in a year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alcestes to the king his suit renews,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next complains, that he rejects his prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length the Thracian fires, and threatens high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By love or force the monarch shall comply.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“So kindling anger waxed between the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It urged them from ill words to worser deed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the king his sword Alcestes drew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though thousands aid the monarch in his need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in despite of all, their sovereign slew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made that day as well the Armenian bleed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Backed by the Thracians’ and Cilicians’ aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other followers, by the warrior paid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“His conquest he pursued, and, at his cost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without expense to us, in less than one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Short month, the kingdom by my father lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Restored; and, to repair the mischief done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Beside spoil given) he conquered with his host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Taxing or taking what his arms had won⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armenia and Cappadocia which confine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scowered Hyrcania to the distant brine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Him not to greet with triumphs, but to slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returning from that warfare, we intend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, fearing failure, our design delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that we find too many him befriend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feeding him aye with hope from day to day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I for the Thracian warrior love pretend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first declare my will that he oppose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prove his valour on our other foes;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And him, now sole, now ill accompanied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On strange and perilous emprize I speed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein a thousand knights might well have died;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all things happily with him succeed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Victory was ever on his side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oft with horrid foes of monstrous breed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Giants and with Lestrigons, who brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Damage in our domains, the warrior fought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor Juno, nor Eurystheus, in such chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ever renowned Alcides vext so sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Erymanth, Nemaea, Lerna, Thrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aetolia, Africa, by Tyber’s shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Ebro’s sunny bank, or other place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As (hiding murderous hate, while I implore)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I exercise my lover still in strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the same fell design upon his life.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>“Unable to achieve my first intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I on a scheme of no less mischief fall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through me, all deemed his friends by him are shent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thus bring down on him the hate of all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Thracian leader never more content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than to obey, whatever be the call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is at my bidding ever prompt to smite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without regarding who or what the wight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>“When I perceive that, through the warrior’s mean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extinguished is my father’s every foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, conquered by himself, that knight is seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Friendless, through us⁠—I now the masque forego;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What I, from him, beneath a flattering mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had hitherto concealed, I plainly show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—What deep and deadly hate by bosom fired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that I but to work his death desired.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Then, thinking if such course I should pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That public shame would still the deed attend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For men too well my obligations knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would be prompt my cruelty to shend.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meseemed enough to drive him from my view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that he should no more my eyes offend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would I more address or see the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor letter would receive or message hear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“This my ingratitude in him such pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length produced, that mastered by his woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After entreating mercy long in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sickened sore and sank beneath the blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For pain which fits my sin, dark fumes now stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My cheek, and with salt rheum mine eyes o’erflow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus in eternal torment shall I dwell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For saving mercy helpeth not in hell.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Since wretched Lydia spake no more, the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would fain discern if more in torment lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, those false ingrates’ curse, the darkness drear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So waxed before him, and obscured the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That not one inch advanced the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay, back parforce returns that warrior; nay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself from that increasing smoke to save,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes for the mouth of the disastrous cave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>The motion of his quickly shifting feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More savours of a run than walk or trot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus mounting the ascent in swift retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho sees the outlet of the grot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, through the darkness of that dismal seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those foul fumes, a dawn of daylight shot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from the cavern, sorely pained and pined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Issues at last, and leaves the smoke behind;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And next to bar the way against that band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose greedy bellies so for victual crave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Picks stones, and trees lays level with his brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which charged with pepper or amomum wave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what might seem a hedge, with busy hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As best he can, constructs before the cave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so succeeds in blocking that repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The harpies shall no more revisit air.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>While in that cave Astolpho did remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fumes that from the sable pitch arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only what appeared to sight did stain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But even so searched the flesh beneath his clothes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sought some cleansing stream, long sought in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But found at length a limpid till, which rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of a living rock, within that wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bathed himself all over in the flood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Then backed the griffin-horse, and soared a flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereby to reach that mountain’s top he schemes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which little distant, with its haughty height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the moon’s circle good Astolpho deems;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, such desire to see it warms the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he aspires to heaven, nor earth esteems.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through air so more and more the warrior strains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he at last the mountain-summit gains.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Here sapphire, ruby, gold, and topaz glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pearl, jacinth, chrysolite and diamond lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which well might pass for natural flowers which blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Catching their colour from that kindly sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So green the grass! could we have such below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We should prefer it to our emerald’s dye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As fair the foliage of those pleasant bowers!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose trees are ever filled with fruit and flowers.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>Warble the wanton birds in verdant brake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Azure, and red, and yellow, green and white.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The quavering rivulet and quiet lake</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In limpid hue surpass the crystal bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A breeze, which with one breath appears to shake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye, without fill or fall, the foliage light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the quick air such lively motion lends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Day’s oppressive noon in nought offends;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>And this, mid fruit and flower and verdure there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Evermore stealing divers odours, went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made of those mixt sweets a medley rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which filled the spirit with a calm content.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the mid plain arose a palace fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which seemed as if with living flames it brent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such passing splendour and such glorious light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shot from those walls, beyond all usage bright.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>Thither where those transparent walls appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which cover more than thirty miles in measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At ease and slowly moved the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And viewed the lovely region at his leisure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deemed⁠—compared with this⁠—that sad and drear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seen by heaven and nature with displeasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was the foul world, wherein we dwell below:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So jocund this, so sweet and fair in show!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Astound with wonder, paused the adventurous knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When to that shining palace he was nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, than the carbuncle more crimson bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seemed one polished stone of sanguine dye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O mighty wonder! O Daedalian sleight!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What fabric upon earth with this can vie?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let them henceforth be silent, that in story</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exalt the world’s seven wonders to such glory!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>An elder, in the shining entrance-hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that glad house, towards Astolpho prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crimson his waistcoat was, and white his pall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vermillion seemed the mantle, milk the vest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">White was that ancient’s hair, and white withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bushy beard descending to his breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from his reverend face such glory beamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the elect of Paradise he seemed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>He, with glad visage, to the paladin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who humbly, from his sell had lighted, cries:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“O gentle baron, that by will divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have soared to this terrestrial paradise!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit nor you the cause of your design,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor you the scope of your desire surmise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believe, you not without high mystery steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hitherward, from your arctic hemisphere.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“You for instruction, how to furnish aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Charles and to the Church in utmost need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With me to counsel, hither are conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who without counsel from such distance speed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, son, ascribe not you the journey made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wit or worth; nor through your winged steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor through your virtuous bugle had ye thriven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that such helping grace from God was given.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“We will discourse at better leisure more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And you what must be done shall after hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But you that, through long fast, must hunger sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First brace your strength with us, with genial cheer.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Continuing his discourse, that elder hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raised mighty wonder in the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he avouched, as he his name disclosed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he THE HOLY GOSPEL, had composed;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He of our Lord so loved, the blessed John;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of whom a speech among the brethren went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He never should see death, and hence the Son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of God with this rebuke St. Peter shent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In saying, “What is it to thee, if one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tarry on earth, till I anew be sent?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit he said not that he should not die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That so he meant to say we plain descry.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Translated thither, he found company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The patriarch Enoch, and the mighty seer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Elias; nor as yet those sainted three</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have seen corruption, but in garden, clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of earth’s foul air, will joy eternity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of spring, till they angelic trumpets hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sounding through heaven and earth, proclaim aloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Christ’s second advent on the silvery cloud.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>The holy ancients to a chamber lead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With welcome kind, the adventurous cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in another then his flying steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sufficiently with goodly forage cheer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho they with fruits of Eden feed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So rich, that in his judgment ’twould appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In some sort might our parents be excused</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If, for such fruits, obedience they refused.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>When with that daily payment which man owes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nature had been contented by the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well of due refreshment as repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For all and every comfort found he here)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now Aurora left her ancient spouse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not for his many years to her less dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rising from bed, Astolpho at his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The apostle, so beloved of God, espied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Much that not lawfully could here be shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Taking him by the hand, to him he read.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“To you, though come from France, may be unknown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What there hath happened,” next the apostle said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Learn, your Orlando, for he hath foregone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The way wherein he was enjoined to tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is visited of God, that ever shends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him whom he loveth best, when he offends:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“He, your Orlando, at his birth endowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sovereign daring and with sovereign might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On whom, beyond all usage, God bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The grace, that weapon him should vainly smite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he was selected from the crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be defender of his Church’s right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he elected Sampson, called whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Jew against the Philistine to cheer;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“He, your Orlando, for such gifts has made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unto his heavenly Lord an ill return:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who left his people, when most needing aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then most abandoned to the heathens’ scorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Incestuous love for a fair paynim maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had blinded so that knight, of grace forlorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That twice and more in fell and impious strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The count has sought his faithful cousin’s life.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Hence God hath made him mad, and, in this vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Belly, and breast, and naked flesh expose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so diseased and troubled is his brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That none, and least himself, the champion knows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nebuchadnezzar whilom to such pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God in his vengeance doomed, as story shows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sent, for seven years, of savage fury full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To feed on grass and hay, like slavering bull.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“But yet, because the Christian paladine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has sinned against his heavenly Maker less,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He only for three months, by will divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is doomed to cleanse himself of his excess.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet with other scope did your design</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of wending hither the Redeemer bless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that through us the mode you should explore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando’s missing senses to restore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>” ’Tis true to journey further ye will need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wholly must you leave this nether sphere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the moon’s circle you I have to lead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all the planets to our world most near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because the medicine, that is fit to speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Insane Orlando’s cure, is treasured here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This night will we away, when over head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her downward rays the silver moon shall shed.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>In talk the blest apostle is diffuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On this and that, until the day is worn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when the sun is sunk i’ the salt sea ooze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And overhead the moon uplifts her horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A chariot is prepared, erewhile in use</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To scower the heavens, wherein of old was borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Jewry’s misty mountains to the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sainted Elias, rapt from mortal eye.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Four goodly coursers next, and redder far</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than flame, to that fair chariot yokes the sire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, when the knight and he well seated are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Collects the reins; and heavenward they aspire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In airy circles swiftly rose the car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And reached the region of eternal fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose heat the saint by miracle suspends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While through the parted air the pair ascends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>The chariot, towering, threads the fiery sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rises thence into the lunar reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This, in its larger part they find as clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As polished steel, when undefiled by stain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such it seems, or little less, when near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As what the limits of our earth contain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such as our earth, the last of globes below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Including seas, which round about it flow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Here doubly waxed the paladin’s surprize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see that place so large, when viewed at hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resembling that a little hoop in size,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When from the globe surveyed whereon we stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that he both his eyes behoved to strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he would view Earth’s circling seas and land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that, by reason of the lack of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their images attained to little height.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Here other river, lake, and rich champaign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are seen, than those which are below descried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here other valley, other hill and plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With towns and cities of their own supplied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which mansions of such mighty size contain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such never he before of after spied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here spacious hold and lonely forest lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where nymphs for ever chased the panting prey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He, that with other scope had thither soared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pauses not all these wonder to peruse:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But led by the disciple of our Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His way towards a spacious vale pursues;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A place wherein is wonderfully stored</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whatever on our earth below we lose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Collected there are all things whatsoe’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lost through time, chance, or our own folly, here.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor here alone of realm and wealthy dower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er which aye turns the restless wheel, I say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I speak of what it is not in the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Fortune to bestow, or take away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much fame is here, whereon Time and the Hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like wasting moth, in this our planet prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here countless vows, here prayers unnumbered lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made by us sinful men to God on high:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>The lover’s tears and sighs; what time in pleasure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And play we here unprofitably spend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To this, of ignorant men the eternal leisure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vain designs, aye frustrate of their end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Empty desires so far exceed all measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They o’er that valley’s better part extend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There wilt thou find, if thou wilt thither post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whatever thou on earth beneath hast lost.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>He, passing by those heaps, on either hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of this and now of that the meaning sought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Formed of swollen bladders here a hill did stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence he heard cries and tumults, as he thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These were old crowns of the Assyrian land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Lydian⁠—as that paladin was taught⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grecian and Persian, all of ancient fame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now, alas! well-nigh without a name.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Golden and silver hooks to sight succeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaped in a mass, the gifts which courtiers bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Hoping thereby to purchase future meed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To greedy prince and patron; many a snare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Concealed in garlands, did the warrior heed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who heard, these signs of adulation were;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in cicalas, which their lungs had burst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saw fulsome lays by venal poets versed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Loves of unhappy end in imagery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of gold or jewelled bands he saw exprest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then eagles’ talons, the authority</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With which great lords their delegates invest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bellows filled every nook, the fume and fee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein the favourites of kings are blest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Given to those Ganymedes that have their hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And reft, when faded is their vernal flower.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>O’erturned, here ruined town and castle lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all their wealth: “The symbols” (said his guide)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Of treaties and of those conspiracies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which their conductors seemed so ill to hide.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Serpents with female faces, felonies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of coiners and of robbers, he descried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next broken bottles saw of many sorts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The types of servitude in sorry courts.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>He marks mighty pool of porridge spilled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And asks what in that symbol should be read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hears ’twas charity, by sick men willed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For distribution, after they were dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He passed a heap of flowers, that erst distilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweet savours, and now noisome odours shed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gift (if it may lawfully be said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Constantine to good Sylvester made.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>A large provision, next, of twigs and lime</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Your witcheries, O women!⁠—he explored.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The things he witnessed, to recount in rhyme</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too tedious were; were myriads on record,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sum the remnant ill should I have time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis here that all infirmities are stored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save only Madness, seen not here at all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which dwells below, nor leaves this earthly ball.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>He turns him back, upon some days and deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To look again, which he had lost of yore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, save the interpreter the lesson reads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would know them not, such different form they wore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He next saw that which man so little needs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—As it appears⁠—none pray to Heaven for more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I speak of sense, whereof a lofty mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone surpast all else which I recount.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>It was as ’twere a liquor soft and thin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, save well corked, would from the vase have drained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laid up, and treasured various flasks within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Larger or lesser, to that use ordained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That largest was which of the paladin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anglantes’ lord, the mighty sense contained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from those others was discerned, since writ</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the vessel was ORLANDO’S WIT.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The names of those whose wits therein were pent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thus on all those other flasks espied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much of his own, but with more wonderment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sense of many others he descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, he believed, no dram of theirs had spent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But here, by tokens clear was satisfied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That scantily therewith were they purveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So large the quantity he here surveyed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Some waste on love, some seeking honour, lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their wits, some, scowering seas, for merchandise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some, that on wealthy lords their hope repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And some, befooled by silly sorceries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These upon pictures, upon jewels those;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These on whatever else they highest prize.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astrologers’ and sophists’ wits mid these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many a poet’s too, Astolpho sees.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Since his consent the apostle signified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who wrote the obscure Apocalypse, his own</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He took, and only to his nose applied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When (it appeared) it to its place was gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And henceforth, has Sir Turpin certified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That long time sagely lived king Otho’s son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till other error (as he says) again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deprived the gentle baron of his brain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The fullest vessel and of amplest round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which held the wit Orlando erst possessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho took; nor this so light he found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As it appeared, when piled among the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before, from those bright spheres, now earthward bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His course is to our lower orb addressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him to a spacious palace, by whose side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A river ran, conducts his holy guide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Filled full of fleeces all its chambers were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of wool, silk, linen, cotton, in their hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of diverse dyes and colours, foul and fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yarns to her reel from all those fleeces drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the outer porch, a dame of hoary hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On summer-day thus village wife we view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the new silk is reeled, its filmy twine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wind from the worm, and soak the slender line.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>A second dame replaced the work when done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With other; and one bore it off elsewhere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A third selected from the fleeces spun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mingled by that second, foul from fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“What is this labour?” said the peer to John;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the disciple answered Otho’s heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Know that the Parcae are those ancient wives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in this fashion spin your feeble lives.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>“As long as one fleece lasts, life in such wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Endureth, nor outlasts it by a thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Death and Nature have their watchful eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the hour when each should to his end be brought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The choicest threads are culled for Paradise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, after, for its ornaments are wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fashioned from the strands of foulest show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are galling fetters for the damned below.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>On all the fleeces that erewhile were laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the reel, and culled for other care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The names were graved on little plates, which made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of silver, or of gold, or iron, were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These piled in many heaps he next surveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence an old man some skins was seen to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, seemingly unwearied, hurried sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His restless way retracing evermore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>That elder is so nimble and so prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he seems born to run; he bears away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of those heaps by lapfulls in his vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tickets that the different names display.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherefore and whither he his steps addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To you I shall in other canto say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If you, in sign of pleasure, will attend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that kind audience ye are wont to lend.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
