<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Rogero, as directed by the pair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The giantess Eriphila o’erthrows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That done, he to Alcina’s labyrinth, where</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than one knight is tied and prisoned, goes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him Melissa sage the secret snare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And remedy for that grave evil shows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence he, by her advised, with downcast eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And full of shame forthwith resolves to fly.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>The traveller, he, whom sea or mountain sunder<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref-91" epub:type="noteref">91</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From his own country, sees things strange and new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the misjudging vulgar, which lies under</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mist of ignorance, esteems untrue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rejecting whatsoever is a wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless ’tis palpable and plain to view:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence inexperience, as I know full well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will yield small credence to the tale I tell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>But this be great or small, I know not why</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rabble’s silly judgement I should fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Convinced <em>you</em> will not think the tale a lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In whom the light of reason shines so clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence to you it is I only try</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fruit of my fatigues to render dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I ended where Eriphila in guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of bridge and stream was seen, the passage barred.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Of finest metal was her armour bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With gems of many colours overspread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tawny jacinth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-92" id="noteref-92" epub:type="noteref">92</a> yellow chyrsolite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The emerald green of hue, and ruby red.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mounted, but not on palfrey, for the fight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In place of that, she on a wolf had sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sped on a wolf towards the pass; and rode</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On sell, that rich beyond all custom showed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>No larger wolf, I ween, Apulia roams;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-93" id="noteref-93" epub:type="noteref">93</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More huge than bull, unguided by her hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although upon no bit the monster foams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Docile, I know not why, to her command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The accursed Plague, arrayed in surcoat, comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above her arms, in colour like the sand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, saving in its dye, was of the sort</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which bishops and which prelates wear at court.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-94" id="noteref-94" epub:type="noteref">94</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>The giantess’s crest and shield appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ensign, decked with swoln and poisonous toad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her the two damsels to the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the bridge, prepared for battle, showed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threatening, as wont to some, with levelled spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To do the warrior scorn and bar the road.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bidding him turn, she to Rogero cries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lance he takes, and threats her and defies.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-95" id="noteref-95" epub:type="noteref">95</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>As quick and daring, the gigantic Pest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spurred her wolf, seated well for that dread game:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In mid career she laid her lance in rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made earth quake beneath her as she came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet at the encounter fierce the champaign pressed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For underneath the casque, with stedfast aim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So hard Rogero smote her, that he bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beldam backward six good yards and more:</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>And came already with his lifted blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drawn for that end, to take her haughty head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him an easy task; for she was laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among the grass and flowers, like one that’s dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, “ ’Tis enough that she is vanquished,” said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pair, “No further press thy vengeance dread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sheathe, courteous cavalier, thy sword anew:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-96" id="noteref-96" epub:type="noteref">96</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pass we the river, and our way pursue.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Along the path, which through a forest lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roughish and somedeal ill to beat, they went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besides that strait and stony was the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This, nigh directly, scaled a hill’s ascent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, when arrived upon the summit, they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Issued upon a mead of vast extent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a more pleasant palace on that green</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beheld, and brighter than was ever seen.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>To meet the Child, Alcina, fair of hue,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref-97" epub:type="noteref">97</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Advanced some way beyond the outer gate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, girded by a gay and courtly crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero there received in lordly state:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While all the rest to him such honour do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the knight with such deep reverence wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They could not have displayed more zeal and love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had Jove descended from the choirs above.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>Not so much does the palace, fair to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In riches other princely domes excel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that the gentlest, fairest, company</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the whole world contains, within it dwell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of either sex, with small variety</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between, in youth and beauty matched as well:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fay alone exceeds the rest as far</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the bright sun outshines each lesser star.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>Her shape is of such perfect symmetry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-98" id="noteref-98" epub:type="noteref">98</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As best to feign the industrious painter knows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With long and knotted tresses; to the eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not yellow gold with brighter lustre glows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon her tender cheek the mingled dye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is scattered, of the lily and the rose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like ivory smooth, the forehead gay and round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fills up the space, and forms a fitting bound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>Two black and slender arches rise above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two clear black eyes, say suns of radiant light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which ever softly beam and slowly move;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Round these appears to sport in frolic flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence scattering all his shafts, the little Love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seems to plunder hearts in open sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence, through mid visage, does the nose descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Envy finds not blemish to amend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As if between two vales, which softly curl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mouth with vermeil tint is seen to glow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within are strung two rows of orient pearl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which her delicious lips shut up or show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of force to melt the heart of any churl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">However rude, hence courteous accents flow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here that gentle smile receives its birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which opes at will a paradise on earth.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Like milk the bosom, and the neck of snow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Round is the neck, and full and large the breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, fresh and firm, two ivory apples grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which rise and fall, as, to the margin pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By pleasant breeze, the billows come and go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not prying Argus could discern the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet might the observing eye of things concealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conjecture safely, from the charms revealed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>To all her arms a just proportion bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a white hand is oftentimes descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which narrow is, and somedeal long; and where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No knot appears, nor vein is signified.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For finish of that stately shape and rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A foot, neat, short, and round, beneath is spied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelic visions, creatures of the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Concealed beneath no covering veil can lie.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>A springe is planted in Rogero’s way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On all sides did she speak, smile, sing, or move;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No wonder then the stripling was her prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in the fairy saw such show of love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him the guilt and falsehood little weigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of which the offended myrtle told above.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor will he think that perfidy and guile</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can be united with so sweet a smile.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>No! he could now believe, by magic art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho well transformed upon the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For punishment of foul ungrateful heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And haply meriting severer pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as for all he heard him late impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas prompted by revenge, ’twas false and vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By hate and malice was the sufferer stung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To blame and wound the fay with slanderous tongue.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The beauteous lady whom he loved so well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is newly banished from his altered breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For (such the magic of Alcina’s spell)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She every ancient passion dispossessed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in his bosom, there alone to dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The image of her love, and self impressed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So witched, Rogero sure some grace deserves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If from his faith his frail affection swerves.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>At board lyre, lute and harp of tuneful string,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other sounds, in mixed diversity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made, round about, the joyous palace ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With glorious concert and sweet harmony.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor lacked there well-accorded voice to sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of love, its passion and its ecstasy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor who, with rare inventions, choicely versed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Delightful fiction to the guests rehearsed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>What table, spread by whatsoever heir</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Ninus, though triumphant were the board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or what more famous and more costly, where<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-99" id="noteref-99" epub:type="noteref">99</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cleopatra feasted with the Latian lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could with this banquet’s matchless joys compare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the fond fairy for Rogero stored?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I think not such a feast is spread above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Ganymede presents the cup to Jove.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>They form a ring, the board and festive cheer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-100" id="noteref-100" epub:type="noteref">100</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Removed, and sitting, play a merry game:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each asks, still whispering in a neighbour’s ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What secret pleases best; to knight and dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fair occasion, without let or fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their love, unheard of any, to proclaim.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in conclusion the two lovers plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their word, to meet together on that night.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Soon, and much sooner than their wont, was ended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The game at which the palace inmates play:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When pages on the troop with torches tended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with their radiance chased the night away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek his bed the paladin ascended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Girt with that goodly squadron, in a gay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And airy bower, appointed for his rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid all the others chosen as the best.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And when of comfits and of cordial wine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-101" id="noteref-101" epub:type="noteref">101</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fitting proffer has been made anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The guests their bodies reverently incline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to their bowers depart the courtly crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He upon perfumed sheets, whose texture fine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seemed of Arachne’s loom, his body threw:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hearkening this while with still attentive ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he the coming of the lady hears.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>At every movement heard on distant floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping ’twas her, Rogero raised his head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thinks he hears; but it is heard no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then sighs at his mistake: ofttimes from bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He issued, and undid his chamber door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And peeped abroad, but still no better sped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cursed a thousand times the hour that she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So long retarded his felicity.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Yes, now she comes,” the stripling often said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And reckoned up the paces, as he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from her bower where haply to be made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To that where he was waiting for the fay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These thoughts, and other thoughts as vain, he weighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before she came, and restless at her stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Often believed some hinderance, yet unscanned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might interpose between the fruit and hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>At length, when dropping sweets the costly fay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had put some end to her perfumery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The time now come she need no more delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since all was hushed within the palace, she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stole from her bower alone, through secret way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And passed towards the chamber silently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where on his couch the youthful cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lay, with a heart long torn by Hope and Fear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>When the successor of Astolpho spies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those smiling stars above him, at the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A flame, like that of kindled sulphur, flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through his full veins, as ravished by delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of himself; and now up to the eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plunged in a sea of bliss, he swims outright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He leaps from bed and folds her to his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor waits until the lady he undressed;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Though but in a light sendal clad,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-102" id="noteref-102" epub:type="noteref">102</a> that she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wore in the place of farthingale or gown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which o’er a shift of finest quality,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And white, about her limbs the fay had thrown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mantle yielded at his touch, as he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embraced her, and that veil remained alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which upon every side the damsel shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than clear glass the lily or the rose.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The plant no closer does the ivy clip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With whose green boughs its stem is interlaced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than those fond lovers, each from either’s lip</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The balmy breath collecting, he embraced:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rich perfume this, whose like no seed or slip</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bears in sweet Indian or Sabacan waste;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While so to speak their joys is either fixed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That oftentimes those meeting lips are mixed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>These things were carried closely by the dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And youth, or if surmised, were never bruited;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For silence seldom was a cause for blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But oftener as a virtue well reputed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By those shrewd courtiers, conscious of his claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero is with proffers fair saluted:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worshipped of all those inmates, who fulfil</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this the enamoured far, Alcina’s will.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>No pleasure is omitted there; since they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alike are prisoners in Love’s magic hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They change their raiment twice or thrice a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now for this use, and now at other call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis often feast, and always holiday;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis wrestling, tourney, pageant, bath, and ball.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now underneath a hill by fountain cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They read the amorous lays of ages past:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Now by glad hill, or through the shady dale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They hunt the fearful hare, and now they flush</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With busy dog, sagacious of the trail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wild pheasant from the stubble-field or bush.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now where green junipers perfume the gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suspend the snare, or lime the fluttering thrush:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-103" id="noteref-103" epub:type="noteref">103</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And casting now for fish, with net or book,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disturb their secret haunts in pleasant brook.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero revels there, in like delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While Charles and Agramant are troubled sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not for him their story will I slight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Bradamant forget: who evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid toilsome pain and care, her cherished knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ravished from her, did many a day deplore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom by unwonted ways, transported through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid air, the damsel saw, nor whither knew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Of her I speak before the royal pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who many days pursued her search in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By shadowy wood, or over champaign bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By farm and city, and by hill and plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But seeks her cherished friend with fruitless care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Divided by such space of land and main:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Often she goes among the Paynim spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet never aught of her Rogero hears.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Of hundreds questioned, upon every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each day, no answer ever gives content.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She roams from post to post, and far and wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Searches pavilion, lodging, booth, or rent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this, mid foot or horsemen, unespied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May safely do, without impediment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thanks to the ring, whose more than mortal aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When in her mouth, conceals the vanished maid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>She cannot, will not, think that he is dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because the wreck of such a noble knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would, from Hydaspes’ distant waves have spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To where the sun descends with westering light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She knows not what to think, nor whither sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He roams in earth or air; yet, hapless wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him ever seeks, and for attendant train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has sobs and sighs, and every bitter pain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>At length to find the wondrous cave she thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the prophetic homes of Merlin lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there lament herself until she wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the pitying marble to reply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thence, if yet he lived would she be taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of this glad life to hard necessity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had yielded up; and, when she was possessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the seer’s councils, would pursue the best.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>With this intention, Bradamant her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Directed thither, where in Poictier’s wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vocal tomb, containing Merlin’s clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Concealed in Alpine place and savage, stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that enchantress sage, who night and day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thought of the damsel, watchful for her good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, I repeat, who taught her what should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that fair grotto her posterity;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>She who preserved her with protecting care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That same enchantress, still benign and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, knowing she a matchless race should bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of men, or rather semi-deities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spies daily what her thoughts and actions are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lots for her each day, divining, tries;⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-104" id="noteref-104" epub:type="noteref">104</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She all Rogero’s fortune knew, how freed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then borne to India by the griffin steed:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>Him on that courser plainly she had eyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would not the controlling rein obey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, severed by such interval, he hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Borne through the perilous, unwonted way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knew that he sport, dance, and banquet plied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lapt in idleness and pleasure lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor memory of his lord nor of the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Once loved so well, preserved, not of his fame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>And thus such gentle knight ingloriously</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have consumed his fairest years and best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In long inaction, afterwards to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Body and soul, destroyed; and <em>that</em>, possessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone by us in perpetuity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That flower, whose sweets outlive the fragile rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which quickens man when he in earth is laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have been plucked or severed in the blade.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>But that enchantress kind, who with more care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than for himself he watched, still kept the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Designed to drag him, by rough road and bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards true virtue, in his own despite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As often cunning leech will burn and pare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flesh, and poisonous drug employ aright:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, though at first his cruel art offend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is thanked, since he preserves us in the end.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She, not like old Atlantes, rendered blind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the great love she to the stripling bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Set not on gifting him with life her mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As was the scope of that enchanter hoar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, reckless all of fame and praise declined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wished length of days to his Rogero more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than that, to win a world’s applause, the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should of his joyous life forego one year.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>By him he to Alcina’s isle had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dispatched, that in her palace he might dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forgetting arms; and, as enchanter seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In magic and the use of every spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heart had fastened of that fairy-queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enamoured of the gentle youth, so well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she the knot would never disengage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though he should live to more than Nestor’s age.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>Returning now to her that well foreknew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whatever was to come to pass, I say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She thither did her journey straight pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where she met Aymon’s daughter by the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forlorn and wandering: Bradamant at view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of her enchantress, erst to grief a prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Changes it all to hope: the other tells</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That with Alcina her Rogero dwells.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Nigh dead the maid remains, in piteous guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hearing of him so far removed, and more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grieves that she danger to her love descries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save this some strong and speedy cure restore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But her the enchantress comforts, and applies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A salve where it was needed most, and swore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That few short days should pass before anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero should return to glad her view.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Since thou, an antidote to sorcery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lady (she said), the virtuous ring dost wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I have no doubt if to yon island I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This, where thine every good is hidden, hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To foil Alcina’s wiles and witchery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thence to bring thee back thy cherished care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This evening, early, will I hence away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be in India by the break of day.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And told to her, the tale continuing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mode which she was purposing to employ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From that effeminate, soft realm to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Back into warlike France the cherished boy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant from her finger slipt the ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this alone would have bestowed with joy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But heart and life would at her feet have laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she had deemed they could Rogero aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Giving the ring, her cause she recommends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her, and recommends Rogero more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Countless salutes by her the damsel sends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then of Provence, departing seeks the shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The enchantress to another quarter wends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for the execution of her lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conjures, that eve, a palfrey, by her art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With one foot red, black every other part.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>Some Farfarello, or Alchino he,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-105" id="noteref-105" epub:type="noteref">105</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I think, whom in that form she raised from hell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with loose hair, dishevelled horribly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ungirt and barefoot, mounted in the sell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, with wise caution, from her finger she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Withdrew the ring, lest it should mar the spell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then by him was with such swiftness born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She in Alcina’s isle arrived at morn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>Herself she changed with wonderful disguise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Adding a palm of stature to her height;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made her limbs of a proportioned size;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the very measure seemed to sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As was she deemed, the necromancer wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with such care had reared the youthful knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With long-descending beard she clothed her chin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wrinkled o’er her front and other skin.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>To imitate his speech, and face, and cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She knew so well, that, by the youth descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She might the sage Atlantes’ self appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next hid, and watched so long, that she espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon a day (rare chance) the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length detached from his Alcina’s side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For still, in motion or at rest, the fay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill bore the youth should be an hour away.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Alone she finds him, fitting well her will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he enjoys the pure and morning air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside a brook, which trickled from a hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Streaming towards a limpid lake and fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His fine, soft garments, wove with cunning skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All over, ease and wantonness declare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These with her hand, such subtle toil well taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him in silk and gold Alcina wrought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>About the stripling’s neck, a splendid string</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of gems, descending to mid-breast, is wound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On each once manly arm, now glittering</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the bright hoop, a bracelet fair is bound.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-106" id="noteref-106" epub:type="noteref">106</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pierced with golden wire, in form of ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is either ear; and from the yellow round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Depend two precious pearls; not such the coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Araby or sumptuous India boast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>Crisped into comely ringlets was his hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wet with the costliest odours and the best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And soft and amorous all his gestures were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like one who does Valentian lady’s hest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-107" id="noteref-107" epub:type="noteref">107</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In him, beside his name, was nothing fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more than half corrupted all the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So was Rogero found, within that dell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Changed from his former self by potent spell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Him in the figure of Atlantes sage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She fronts, who bore the enchanter’s borrowed cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that grave face, and reverend with age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he was always wonted to revere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with that eye, which in his pupillage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beaming with wrath, he whilom so did fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sternly cries, “Is this the fruit at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which pays my tedious pain and labour past?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The marrow of the lion and the bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Didst thou for this thine early banquet make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, trained by me, by cliff or cavern-lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strangle with infant hands the crested snake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their claws from tiger and from panther tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tusks from living boar in tangled brake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, bred in such a school, in thee should I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alcina’s Atys or Adonis spy?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Is this the hope that stars, observed by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Signs in conjunction, sacred fibres, bred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With what beside of dream or augury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all those lots I but too deeply read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, while yet hanging at the breast, of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When these thy years should be accomplished, said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy fears should so be bruited far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou justly should be deemed without a peer?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“This does, in truth, a fair beginning show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A seed which, we may hope, will soon conceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A Julius, Alexander, Scipio.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thee Alcina’s bondsman could believe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (for the world the shameful fact might know)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That all should, manifest to sight, perceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon thy neck and arms the servile chains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith she at her will her captive trains?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>“If thine own single honour move not thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the high deeds which thou art called to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherefore defraud thy fair posterity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of what, was oft predicted, should ensue?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! why seal the womb God willed should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pregnant by thee with an illustrious crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That far renowned, and more than human line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Destined the sun in glory to outshine?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Forbid not of the noblest souls the birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Formed in the ideas of <b>eternal mind</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Destined, from age to age, to visit earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sprung from thy stock, and clothed in corporal rind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The spring of thousand palms and festal mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through which, to Italy with losses pined</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wounds, thy good descendants shall restore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fame and honours she enjoyed of yore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Not only should these many souls have weight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bend thy purpose, holy souls, and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from thy fruitful tree shall vegetate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, though alone, a single couple might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suffice a nobler feeling to create,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alphonso and his brother Hyppolite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose like was seldom witnessed to this time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through all the paths whence men to virtue climb.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“I was more wont to dwell upon this pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than all the rest, of whom I prophesied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well that these a greater part should bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In lofty virtues, as that I descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thee, listening to my lore with closer care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than to the tale of all thy seed beside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I saw thee joy that such a pair would shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid the heroes of thy noble line.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Say, what has she, thou makest thy fancy’s queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than what other courtezans possess?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who of so many concubine has been;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How used her lovers in the end to bless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou truly know’st: but that she may be seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without disguise, and in her real dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This ring, returning, on thy finger wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thou shalt see the dame, and mark how fair.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Abashed and mute, Rogero, listening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In vain to her reproof an answer sought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who on his little finger put the ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose virtue to himself the warrior brought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such remorse and shame within him spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When on his altered sense the change is wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand fathoms deep he fain would lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Buried in earth, unseen of any eye.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>So speaking, to the natural shape she wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before his eyes returned the magic dame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor old Atlantes’ form was needed more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The good effect obtained for which she came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To tell you that which was not told before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melissa was the sage enchantress’ name:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to Rogero now her purpose said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And told with what design she thither sped:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Dispatched by her, who him in anxious pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desires, nor longer can without him be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the intent to loose him from the chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith he was begirt by sorcery;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had put on, more credence to obtain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Atlantes de Carena’s form; but she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing his health restored, now willed the youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through her should hear and see the very truth.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“That gentle lady who so loves thee, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were well deserving love upon thy part:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom (unless forgot, thou know’st how true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tale) thou debtor for thy freedom art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This ring, which can each magic spell undo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sends for thy succour, and would send her heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If with such virtue fraught, her heart could bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thee safely in thy perils, like the ring.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>How Bradamant had loved, and loves, she says,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Continuing to Rogero her relation:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To this, her worth commends with fitting praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tempering in truth and fondness her narration;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still employs the choicest mode and phrase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which fits one skilful in negociation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the false Alcina brings such hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As on things horrible is wont to wait;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Brings hate on that which he so loved before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor let the tale astonish which you hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For since his love was forced by magic lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ring the false enchantment served to clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This too unmasked the charms Alcina wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made all false, from head to food, appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None of her own, but borrowed, all he sees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the once sparkling cup now drugged with lees.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Like boy who somewhere his ripe fruit bestows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next forgets the place where it is laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, after many days, conducted goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By chance, where he the rich deposit made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wonders that the hidden treasure shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not what it is, but rotten and decayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hates, and scorns, and loathes, with altered eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And throws away what he was used to prize.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero thus, when by Melissa’s lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Advised, he to behold the fay returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that good ring of sovereign virtue wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, on the finger placed, all spells o’erturned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that fair damsel he had left before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his surprise, so foul a dame discerned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in this ample world, examined round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hag so old and hideous is not found.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Pale, lean, and wrinkled was the face, and white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thinly clothed with hair Alcina’s head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her stature reached not to six palms in height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every tooth was gone; for she had led</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A longer life than ever mortal wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Hecuba or she in Cuma bred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But thus by practice, to our age unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared with youth and beauty not her own.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>By art she gave herself the lovely look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had on many like Rogero wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now the ring interpreted the book,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which secrets, hid for many ages, taught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No wonder then that he the dame forsook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And banished from his mind all further thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of love for false Alcina, found in guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which no new means of slippery fraud supplies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>But, as Melissa counselled him, he wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His wonted semblance for a time, till he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was with his armour, many days before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laid by, again accoutred cap-a-pee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, lest Alcina should his end explore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feigned to make proof of his agility;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feigned to make proof if for his arms he were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too gross, long time unwont the mail to bear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Next Balisarda to his flank he tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For so Rogero’s trenchant sword was hight),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And took the wondrous buckler, which, espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only dazzled the beholder’s sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But seemed, when its silk veil was drawn aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As from the body if exhaled the sprite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In its close cover of red sendal hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This at his neck the youthful warrior slung.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Provided thus, he to the stables came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bade with bridle and with saddle dight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A horse more black than pitch; for so the dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Counselled, well-taught how swift the steed and light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him Rabicano those who know him name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he the courser was, that with the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who stands beside the sea, the breeze’s sport,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The whale of yore conducted to that port.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The hippogryph he might have had at need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who next below good Rabican was tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that the dame had cried to him, “Take heed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou know’st how ill that courser is to ride;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said the following day the winged steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas her intention from that realm to guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he should be instructed at his leisure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rein and run him every where at pleasure:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor, if he took him not, would he suggest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suspicion of the intended flight: The peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while performed Melissa’s every hest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, still invisible, was at his ear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So feigning, from the wanton dome possessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By that old strumpet, rode the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pricking forth drew near unto a gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence the road led to Logistilla’s state.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Assaulting suddenly the guardian crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, sword in hand, the squadron set upon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This one he wounded, and that other slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, point by point made good, the drawbridge won:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ere of his escape Alcina knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gentle youth was far away and gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My next shall tell his route, and how he gained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At last the realm where Logistilla reigned.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
