<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-19" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Medoro, by Angelica’s quaint hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is healed, and weds, and bears her to Catay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length Marphisa, with the chosen band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long suffering, makes Laiazzi’s bay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Guido the savage, bondsman in the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which impious women rule with civil sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Marphisa strives in single fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lodges her and hers at full of night.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>By whom he is beloved can no one know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who on the top of Fortune’s wheel is seated;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since he, by true and faithless friends, with show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of equal faith, in glad estate is greeted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, should felicity be changed to woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flattering multitude is turned and fleeted!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While he who loves his master from his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even after death performs his faithful part.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Were the heart seen as is the outward cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He who at court is held in sovereign grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he that to his lord is little dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With parts reversed, would fill each other’s place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The humble man the greater would appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, now first, be hindmost in the race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But be Medoro’s faithful story said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youth who loved his lord, alive or dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>The closest path, amid the forest gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To save himself, pursued the youth forlorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all his schemes were marred by the delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that sore weight upon his shoulders born.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The place he knew not, and mistook the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hid himself again in sheltering thorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Secure and distant was his mate, that through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The greenwood shade with lighter shoulders flew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>So far was Cloridan advanced before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He heard the boy no longer in the wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when he marked the absence of Medore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seemed as if his heart was left behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Ah! how was I so negligent,” (the Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaimed) “so far beside myself, and blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I, Medoro, should without thee fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor know when I deserted thee or where?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>So saying, in the wood he disappears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plunging into the maze with hurried pace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thither, whence he lately issued, steers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, desperate, of death returns in trace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cries and the tread of steeds this while he hears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And word and the tread of foemen, as in chase:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lastly Medoro by his voice is known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disarmed, on foot, ‘mid many horse, alone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>A hundred horsemen who the youth surround,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino leads, and bids his followers seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stripling: like a top, the boy turns round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And keeps him as he can: among the trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind oak, elm, beech, ash, he takes his ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor from the cherished load his shoulders frees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wearied, at length, the burden he bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the grass, and stalked about his load.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>As in her rocky cavern the she-bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With whom close warfare Alpine hunters wage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uncertain hangs about her shaggy care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And growls in mingled sound of love and rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To unsheath her claws, and blood her tushes bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would natural hate and wrath the beast engage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love softens her, and bids from strife retire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for her offspring watch, amid her ire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Cloridan who to aid him knows not how,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with Medoro willingly would die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But who would not for death this being forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until more foes than one should lifeless lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ambushed, his sharpest arrow to his bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fits, and directs it with so true an eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The feathered weapon bores a Scotchman’s brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lays the warrior dead upon the plain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>Together, all the others of the band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turned thither, whence was shot the murderous reed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile he launched another from his stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That a new foe might by the weapon bleed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom (while he made of this and that demand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And loudly questioned who had done the deed)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The arrow reached⁠—transfixed the wretch’s throat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cut his question short in middle note.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>Zerbino, captain of those horse, no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can at the piteous sight his wrath refrain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In furious heat, he springs upon Medore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaiming, “Thou of this shalt bear the pain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One hand he in his locks of golden ore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enwreaths, and drags him to himself amain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, as his eyes that beauteous face survey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Takes pity on the boy, and does not slay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>To him the stripling turns, with suppliant cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, “By thy God, sir knight,” exclaims, “I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be not so passing cruel, nor deny</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I in earth my honoured king may lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No other grace I supplicate, nor I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This for the love of life, believe me, say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So much, no longer, space of life I crave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As may suffice to give my lord a grave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And if you needs must feed the beast and bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like Theban Creon, let their worst be done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon these limbs; so that by me interred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In earth be those of good Almontes’ son.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Medoro thus his suit, with grace, preferred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And words⁠—to move a mountain, and so won</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon Zerbino’s mood, to kindness turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With love and pity he all over burned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>This while, a churlish horseman of the band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who little deference for his lord confest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His lance uplifting, wounded overhand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The unhappy suppliant in his dainty breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino, who the cruel action scanned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was deeply stirred, the rather that, opprest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And livid with the blow the churl had sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Medoro fell as he was wholly dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>So grieved Zerbino, with such wrath was stung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Not unavenged shalt thou remain,” he cries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then full of evil will in fury sprung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the author of the foul emprize.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he his vantage marks, and, from among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warriors, in a moment slips and flies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cloridan who beholds the deed, at sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of young Medoro’s fall, springs forth to fight;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>And casts away his bow, and, ‘mid the band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of foemen, whirls his falchion, in desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather of death, than hoping that his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May snatch a vengeance equal to his ire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid so many blades, he views the sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tinged with his blood, and ready to expire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And feeling he the sword no more can guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lets himself drop by his Medoro’s side.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The Scots pursue their chief, who pricks before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the deep wood, inspired by high disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he has left the one and the other Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This dead, that scarce alive, upon the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There for a mighty space lay young Medore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spouting his life-blood from so large a vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would have perished, but that thither made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A stranger, as it chanced, who lent him aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>By chance arrived a damsel at the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was (though mean and rustic was her wear)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of royal presence and of beauteous face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lofty manners, sagely debonair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her have I left unsung so long a space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That you will hardly recognise the fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica, in her (if known not) scan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lofty daughter of Catay’s great khan.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Angelica, when she had won again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ring Brunello had from her conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So waxed in stubborn pride and haught disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She seemed to scorn this ample world, and strayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone, and held as cheap each living swain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although, amid the best, by Fame arrayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor brooked she to remember a galant</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Count Orlando or king Sacripant;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And above every other deed repented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That good Rinaldo she had loved of yore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that to look so low she had consented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As by such choice dishonoured) grieved her sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love, hearing this, such arrogance resented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would the damsel’s pride endure no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where young Medoro lay he took his stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And waited her, with bow and shaft in hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>When fair Angelica the stripling spies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nigh hurt to death in that disastrous fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for his king, that there unsheltered lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More sad than for his own misfortune lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She feels new pity in her bosom rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which makes its entry in unwonted way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Touched was her haughty heart, once hard and curst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more when he his piteous tale rehearsed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>And calling back to memory her art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For she in Ind had learned chirurgery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Since it appears such studies in that part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthy of praise and fame are held to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as an heir-loom, sires to sons impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With little aid of books, the mystery)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disposed herself to work with simples’ juice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till she in him should healthier life produce;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>And recollects a herb had caught her sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In passing hither, on a pleasant plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What (whether dittany or pancy hight)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not; fraught with virtue to restrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The crimson blood forth-welling, and of might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sheathe each perilous and piercing pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She found it near, and having pulled the weed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returned to seek Medoro on the mead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Returning, she upon a swain did light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was on horseback passing through the wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strayed from the lowing herd, the rustic wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A heifer, missing for two days, pursued.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him she with her conducted, where the might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the faint youth was ebbing with his blood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had the ground about so deeply dyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Life was nigh wasted with the gushing tide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Angelica alights upon the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he her rustic comrade, at her hest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She hastened ’twixt two stones the herb to pound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then took it, and the healing juice exprest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this did she foment the stripling’s wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, even to the hips, his waist and breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (with such virtue was the salve endued)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It stanched his life-blood, and his strength renewed;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>And into him infused such force again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he could mount the horse the swain conveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But good Medoro would not leave the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he in earth had seen his master laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, with the monarch, buried Cloridane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And after followed whither pleased the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was to stay with him, by pity led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the courteous shepherd’s humble shed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor would the damsel quit the lowly pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So she esteemed the youth) till he was sound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such pity first she felt, when him erewhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She saw outstretched and bleeding on the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Touched by his mien and manners next, a file</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She felt corrode her heart with secret wound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She felt corrode her heart, and with desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By little and by little warmed, took fire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The shepherd dwelt, between two mountains hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In goodly cabin, in the greenwood shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With wife and children; and, short time before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The brent-new shed had builded in the glade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here of his griesly wound the youthful Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was briefly healed by the Catayan maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But who in briefer space, a sorer smart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than young Medoro’s, suffered at her heart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>A wound far wider and which deeper lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now in her heart she feels, from viewless bow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from the boy’s fair hair and beauteous eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had the winged archer dealt: a sudden glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She feels, and still the flames increasing rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet less she heeds her own than other’s woe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Heeds not herself, and only to content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The author of her cruel ill is bent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Her ill but festered and increased the more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stripling’s wounds were seen to heal and close:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youth grew lusty, while she suffered sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with new fever parched, now burnt, now froze:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From day to day in beauty waxed Medore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She miserably wasted; like the snow’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unseasonable flake, which melts away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exposed, in sunny place, to scorching ray.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>She, if of vain desire will not die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must help herself, nor yet delay the aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she in truth, her will to satisfy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deemed ’twas no time to wait till she was prayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next of shame renouncing every tye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With tongue as bold as eyes, petition made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And begged him, haply an unwitting foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sheathe the suffering of that cruel blow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>O Count Orlando, O king of Circassy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say what your valour has availed to you!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say what your honour boots, what goodly fee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remunerates ye both, for service true!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sirs, show me but a single courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With which she ever graced ye⁠—old or new⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As some poor recompense, desert, or guerdon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For having born so long so sore a burden!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Oh! couldst thou yet again to life return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How hard would this appear, O Agricane!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that she whilom thee was wont to spurn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sharp repulse and insolent disdain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O Ferrau, O ye thousand more, forlorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unsung, who wrought a thousand feats in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this ungrateful fair, what pain ’twould be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could you within his arms the damsel see!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>To pluck, as yet untouched, the virgin rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica permits the young Medore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was none so blest as in that garden’s close</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet to have set his venturous foot before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They holy ceremonies interpose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Somedeal to veil⁠—to gild⁠—the matter o’er.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Young Love was bridesman there the tie to bless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for brideswoman stood the shepherdess.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>In the low shed, with all solemnities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The couple made their wedding as they might;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there above a month, in tranquil guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The happy lovers rested in delight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save for the youth the lady has no eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor with his looks can satisfy her sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet of hanging on his neck can tire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of feel she can content her fond desire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>The beauteous boy is with her night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Does she untent herself, or keep the shed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Morning or eve they to some meadow stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now to this bank, and to that other led:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply, in cavern harboured, at mid-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grateful as that to which Aeneas fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Dido, when the tempest raged above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The faithful witness to their secret love.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Amid such pleasures, where, with tree o’ergrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ran stream, or bubbling fountain’s wave did spin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On bark or rock, if yielding were the stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knife was straight at work or ready pin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there, without, in thousand places lone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in as many places graved, within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">MEDORO and ANGELICA were traced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In divers cyphers quaintly interlaced.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>When she believed they had prolonged their stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than enow, the damsel made design</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In India to revisit her Catay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with its crown Medoro’s head entwine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She had upon her wrist an armlet, gay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With costly gems, in witness and in sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of love to her by Count Orlando borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And which the damsel for long time had worn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>On Ziliantes, hid beneath the wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This Morgue bestowed; and from captivity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youth (restored to Monodantes grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His ancient sire, through Roland’s chivalry)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Roland in return the bracelet gave:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roland, a lover, deigned the gorgeous fee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wear, with the intention to convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The present to his queen, of whom I say.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>No love which to the paladin she bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that it costly is and wrought with care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This to Angelica so much endears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That never more esteemed was matter rare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This she was suffered, in THE ISLE OF TEARS,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not by what privilege, to wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, naked, to the whale exposed for food</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By that inhospitable race and rude.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>She, not possessing wherewithal to pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The kindly couple’s hospitality,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Served by them in their cabin, from the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She there was lodged, with such fidelity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unfastened from her arm the bracelet gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bade them keep it for her memory.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Departing hence the lovers climb the side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of hills, which fertile France from Spain divide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>Within Valencia or Barcelona’s town</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The couple thought a little to remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until some goodly ship should make her boun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To loose for the Levant: as so the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Journey, beneath Gerona⁠—coming down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those mountains⁠—they behold the subject main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And keeping on their left the beach below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By beaten track to Barcelona go.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>But, ere they there arrive, a crazed wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They find, extended on the outer shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who is bedaubed like swine, in filthy plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And smeared with mud, face, reins, and bosom o’er’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He comes upon them, as a dog in spite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swiftly assails the stranger at the door;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And is about to do the lovers scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to the bold Marphisa I return⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa, Astolpho, Gryphon, Aquilant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of these and of the others will I tell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, death before their eyes, the vext Levant</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Traverse, and ill resist the boisterous swell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While aye more passing proud and arrogant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waxes in rage and threat the tempest fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now three days the angry gale has blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor signal of abatement yet has shown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Waves lifted by the waxing tempest start</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Castle and flooring, and, if yet there be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aught standing left in any other part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis cut away and cast into the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here, pricking out their course upon the chart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One by a lantern does his ministry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon a sea-chest propt; another wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is busied in the well by torch’s light.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>This one beneath the poop, beneath the prow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That other, stands to watch the ebbing sand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (each half-glass run out) returns to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What way the ship has made, and towards what land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence all to speak their different thoughts, below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To midships make resort, with chart in hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There where the mariners, assembled all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are met in council, at the master’s call.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>One says: “Abreast of Limisso are we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among the shoals”⁠—and by his reckoning, nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rocks of Tripoli and bark must be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where shipwrecked, for the most part, vessels lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another: “We are lost on Sataly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose coast makes many patrons weep and sigh.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">According to their judgment, all suggest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their treasons, each with equal dread opprest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>More spitefully the wind on the third day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blows, and the sea more yeasty billows rears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fore-mast by the first is borne away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rudder by the last, with him who steers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better than steel that man will bide the assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Of marble breast⁠—who has not now his fears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa, erst so confident ‘mid harms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Denied not but that day she felt alarms.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>A pilgrimage is vowed to Sinai,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Cyprus and Gallicia, and to Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ettino, and other place of sanctity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If such is named, and to the holy tomb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile, above the sea and near the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bark is tost, with shattered plank and boom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From which the crew had cut, in her distress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mizenmast, to make her labour less.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>They bale and chest and all their heavy lumber</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast overboard, from poop, and prow, and side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every birth and cabin disencumber</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of merchandize, to feed the greedy tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Water to water others of the number</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rendered, by whom the spouting pumps were plied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This in the hold bestirs himself, where’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Planks opened by the beating sea appear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>They in this trouble, in this woe, remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For full four days; and helpless was their plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a full victory the sea had gained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If yet a little had endured its spite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But them with hope of clearer sky sustained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wished appearance of St. Elmo’s light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which (every spar was gone) descending glowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon a boat, which in the prow was stowed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>When, flaming, they the beauteous light surveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All those aboard kneeled down in humble guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Heaven for peace and for smooth water prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With trembling voices and with watery eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor longer waxed the storm, which had dismayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till then enduring in such cruel wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">North-wester or cross-wind no longer reigns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But tyrant of the sea the south remains.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>This on the sea remained so passing strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from its sable mouth so fiercely blew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bore with it so swift a stream and strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the vext waters, that it hurried through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their tumbling waves the shattered bark along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faster than gentle falcon ever flew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sore the patron feared, to the world’s brink</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It would transport his bark, or wreck or sink.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>For this the master finds a remedy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who bids them cast out spars, and veer away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A line which holds this float, and as they flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, by two-thirds, their furious course delay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This counsel boots, and more the augury</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From him whose lights upon the gunwale play.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This saves the vessel, haply else undone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And makes her through the sea securely run.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>They, driven on Syria, in Laiazzo’s bay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mighty city rise; so nigh at hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they can from the vessel’s deck survey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two castles, which the port within command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pale turns the patron’s visage with dismay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he perceives what is the neighbouring land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who will not to the port for shelter hie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet can keep the open sea, nor fly.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>They cannot fly, nor yet can keep the sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For mast and yards are gone, and by the stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the huge billows beating frequently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loosened is plank, and beam and timber broke:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And certain death to make the port would be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or to be doomed to a perpetual yoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For each is made a slave, or sentenced dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither by evil Chance or Error led.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Sore dangerous ’twas to doubt; lest hostile band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should sally from the puissant town in sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With armed barks, and upon theirs lay hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In evil case for sea, and worse for fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time the patron knows not what command</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To give, of him inquires the English knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What kept his mind suspended in that sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And why at first he had not made the port.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>To him relates the patron how a crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of murderous women tenanted that shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, by their ancient law, enslave or slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All those whom Fortune to this kingdom bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that he only could such for eschew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in the lists ten champions overbore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having this achieved, the following night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In bed should with ten damsels take delight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And if he brings to end the former feat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But afterwards the next unfinished leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They kill him, and as slaves his following treat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Condemned to delve their land or keep their beeves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—If for the first and second labour meet⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He liberty for all his band achieves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not for himself; who there must stay and wed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ten wives by him selected for his bed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>So strange a custom of the neighbouring strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without a laugh Astolpho cannot hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sansonet and Marphisa, near at hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next Aquilant, and he, his brother dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrive: to them the patron who from land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye keeps aloof, explains the cause of fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cries: “I liefer in the sea would choke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than here of servitude endure the yoke.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>The sailors by the patron’s rede abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the passengers affrighted sore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save that Marphisa took the other side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hers, who deemed that safer was the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than sea, which raging round them, far and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than a hundred thousand swords dismayed them more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Them little this, or other place alarms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that they have but power to wield their arms.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The warriors are impatient all to land:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But boldest is of these the English peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knowing how soon his horn will clear the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the scared foe its pealing sound shall hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To put into the neighbouring port this band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desires, and are at strife with those who fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they who are the strongest, in such sort</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Compel the patron, that he makes the port.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Already when their bark was first espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At sea, within the cruel city’s view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They had observed a galley, well supplied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With practised mariners and numerous crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(While them uncertain counsels did divide)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make for their wretched ship, the billows through:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her lofty prow to their short stern and low</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These lash, and into port the vessel tow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>They thitherward were worked with warp and oar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than with assistance of the sail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since to lay starboard course or larboard more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No means were left them by the cruel gale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again their rugged rhind the champions wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Girding the faithful falchion with the mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with unceasing hope of comfort fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Master and mariners opprest with dread.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Like a half-moon, projected from the beach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than four miles about, the city’s port;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Six hundred paces deep; and crowning each</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Horn of the circling haven, was a fort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On every side, secure from storm or breach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Save only from the south, a safe resort)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In guise of theatre the town extended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About it, and a hill behind ascended.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>No sooner there the harboured ship was seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(The news had spread already through the land)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than thitherward, with martial garb and mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Six thousand women trooped, with bow in hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, to remove all hope of flight, between</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One castle and the other, drew a band;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with strong chains and barks the port enclosed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which ever, for that use, they kept disposed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>A dame, as the Cumean sybil gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Hector’s ancient mother of renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made call the patron out, and bade him say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If they their lives were willing to lay down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or were content beneath the yoke to stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">According to the custom of the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—One of two evils they must choose⁠—be slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or captives, one and all, must there remain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>” ’Tis true, if one so bold and of such might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be found amid your crew,” (the matron said),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That he ten men of ours engage in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And can in cruel battle lay them dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, after, with ten women, in one night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suffice to play the husband’s part in bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He shall remain our sovereign, and shall sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The land, and you may homeward wend your way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And at your choice to stay shall also be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether a part or all, but with this pact,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he who here would stay and would be free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can with ten dames the husband’s part enact.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if your chosen warrior fall or flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By his ten enemies at once attacked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or for the second function have not breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To slavery you we doom, and him to death.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>At what she deemed the cavaliers would start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beldam found them bold; for to compete</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With those they should engage, and play their part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The champions hoped alike in either feat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor failed renowned Marphisa’s valiant heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit for the second dance unmeet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Secure, where nature had her aid denied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The want should with the falchion be supplied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>The patron is commanded their reply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved in common council to unfold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dames at pleasure may their prowess try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shall in lists and bed allow them bold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lashings from the vessels they untie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The skipper heaves the warp, and bids lay hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lowers the bridge; o’er which, in warlike weed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The expectant cavaliers their coursers lead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>These through the middle of the city go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And see the damsels, as they forward fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ride through the streets, succinct, in haughty show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And arm, in guise of warriors, in the square.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor to gird sword, nor fasten spur below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is man allowed, nor any arm to wear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Excepting, as I said, the ten; to follow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ancient usage which those women hallow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>All others of the manly sex they seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To ply the distaff, broider, card and sow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In female gown descending to the feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which renders them effeminate and slow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some chained, another labour to complete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are tasked, to keep their cattle, or to plough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Few are the males; and scarce the warriors ken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid a thousand dames, a hundred men.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The knights determining by lot to try</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in their common cause on listed ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should slay the ten, with whom they were to vie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the other field ten others wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Designed to pass the bold Marphisa by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believing she unfitting would be found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would be, in the second joust at eve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill-qualified the victory to achieve.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>But with the others she, the martial maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will run her risque; and ’tis her destiny.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I will lay down this life,” the damsel said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Rather than you lay down your liberty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But this”⁠—with that she pointed to the blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which she had girt⁠—“is your security,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will all tangles in such manner loose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Alexander did the Gordian noose.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“I will not henceforth stranger shall complain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So long as the world lasts, of this repair.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So said the maid, nor could the friendly train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Take from her what had fallen to her share.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then⁠—either every thing to lose, or gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their liberty⁠—to her they leave the care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With stubborn plate and mail all over steeled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ready for cruel fight, she takes the field.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>High up the spacious city is place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With steps, which serve as seats in rising rows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which for nought else is used, except the chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tourney, or wrestling match, or such-like shows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Four gates of solid bronze the rabble flows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In troubled tide; and to Marphisa bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she may enter, afterwards is told.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>On pieballed horse Marphisa entered⁠—spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were circles dappling all about his hair⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a bold countenance and little head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And beauteous points, and haughty gait and air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of a thousand coursers which he fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, as the best, and biggest, and most rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Norandino chose, and, decked with brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And costly trappings, to Marphisa gave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Through the south gate, from the mid-day, the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa entered, nor expected long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before she heard approaching trumpet-strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Peal through the lists in shrilling notes and strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, looking next towards the northern wain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saw her ten opposites appear: among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These, as their leader, pricked a cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Excelling all the rest in goodly cheer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>On a large courser came the leading foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which was, excepting the near foot behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And forehead, darker than was ever crow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His foot and forehead with some white were signed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The horseman did his horse’s colours show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his own dress; and hence might be divined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, as the mournful hue o’erpowered the clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was less inclined to smile, than mournful tear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>At once their spears in rest nine warriors laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the trump sounded, in the hostile train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he in black no sign of jousting made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if he held such vantage in disdain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better he deemed the law were disobeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than that his courtesy should suffer stain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight retires apart, and sits to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What against nine one single lance can do.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Of smooth and balanced pace, the damsel’s horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the encounter her with swiftness bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who poised a lance so massive in the course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It would have been an overweight for four.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, disembarking, as of greatest force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The boom had chosen out of many more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At her fierce semblance when in motion, quail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand hearts, a thousand looks grow pale.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>The bosom of the first she opens so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As might surprise, if naked were the breast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She pierced the cuirass and the mail below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first a buckler, solid and well prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A yard behind the shoulders of the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was seen the steel, so well was it addrest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Speared on her lance she left him on the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at the others drove with flowing rein;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And so she shocked the second of the crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dealt the third so terrible a blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From sell and life, with broken spine, the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She drove at once. So fell the overthrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with such weight she charged the warriors through!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So serried was the battle of the foe!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I have seen bombard open in such mode</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The squadrons, as that band Marphisa strowed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Many good spears were broken on the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was as little moved as solid wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When revellers play the chace’s merry game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is ever moved by stroke of heavy ball.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So hard the temper of her corslet’s mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The strokes aye harmless on the breast-plate fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose steel was heated in the fires of hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in Avernus’ water slaked by spell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>At the end of the career, she checked her steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wheeled him about, and for a little stayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then against the others drove at speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Broke them, and to the handle dyed her blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here shorn of arms, and there of head, they bleed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other in such manner cleft the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That breast, and head, and arms together fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Belly and legs remaining in the sell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>With such just measure him she cleaves, I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the two haunches and the ribs confine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leaves him a half figure, in such way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As what we before images divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of silver, oftener made of wax, survey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which supplicants from far and near enshrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In thanks for mercy shown, and to bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A pious quittance for accepted vow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa next made after one that flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And overtook the wretch, and cleft (before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He the mid square had won) his collar through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So clean, no surgeon ever pieced it more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One after other, all in fine she slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or wounded every one she smote so sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She was secure, that never more would foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arise anew from earth, to work her woe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The cavalier this while had stood aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had the ten conducted to the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since, with so many against one to ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had seemed to him advantage four and base;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, now he by a single hand espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So speedily his whole array displaced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pricked forth against the martial maid, to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas courtesy, not fear, had made him slow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>He, signing with his right hand, made appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he would speak ere their career was run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor thinking that beneath such manly cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A gentle virgin was concealed, begun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I wot thou needs must be, sir cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore wearied with such mighty slaughter done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if I were disposed to weary thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than thou art, it were discourtesy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>“To thee, to rest until to-morrow’s light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to renew the battle, I concede.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No honour ’twere to-day to prove my might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On thee, whom weak and overwrought I read.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Arms are not new to me, nor listed fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor does fatigue so short a toil succeed,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Answered Marphisa, “and I, at my post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hope to prove this upon thee, to thy cost.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>“I thank thee for thy offer of delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But need not what thy courtesy agrees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet remains so large a space of day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twere very shame to spend it all in ease.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Oh! were I (he replied) so sure to appay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My heart with everything which best would please,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As thine I shall appay in this!⁠—but see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ere thou thinkest, daylight fail not thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>So said he, and obedient to his hest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two spears, say rather heavy booms, they bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to Marphisa bids consigns the best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the other takes himself: the martial pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already, with their lances in the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wait but till other blast the joust declare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! earth and air and sea the noise rebound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As they prick forth, at the first trumpet’s sound!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>No mouth was opened and no eyelid fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor breath was drawn, amid the observant crew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So sore intent was every one to spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which should be conqueror of the warlike two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa the black champion from his sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So to o’erthrow he shall not rise anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Levels her lance; and the black champion, bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To slay Marphisa, spurs with like intent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Both lances, made of willow thin and dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than stout and stubborn oak, appeared;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So splintered even to the rest, they fly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While with such force the encountering steeds careered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seemed, as with a scythe-blade equally</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hams of either courser had been sheared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alike both fall; but voiding quick the seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The nimble riders start upon their feet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa in her life, with certain wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand cavaliers on earth had laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And never had herself been borne to ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet quitted now the saddle, as was said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only at the accident astound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But nigh beside herself, remained the maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strange to the sable cavalier withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unwont to be unhorsed, appeared his fall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>They scarcely touch the ground before they gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their feet, and now the fierce assault renew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With cut and thrust; which now with shield the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or blade ward off, and now by leaps eschew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether the foes strike home, or smite in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blows ring, and echo parted aether through.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More force those shields, those helms, those breast-plates show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than anvils underneath the sounding blow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>If heavy falls the savage damsel’s blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That falls not lightly of her warlike foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equal the measure one the other paid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And both receive as much as they bestow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He who would see two daring spirits weighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek two fiercer need no further go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor to seek more dexterity or might;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For greater could not be in mortal wight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The women who have sate long time, to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The champions with such horrid strokes offend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor sign of trouble in the warriors true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold, nor yet of weariness, commend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Them with just praises, as the worthiest two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That are, where’er the sea’s wide arms extend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They deem these of mere toil and labour long</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must die, save they be strongest of the strong.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Communing with herself, Marphisa said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That he moved not before was well for me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who risqued to have been numbered with the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he at first had joined his company.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since, as it is, I hardly can make head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against his deadly blows.” This colloquy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She with herself maintained, and while she spoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ceased not to ply her sword with circling stroke.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>” ’Twas well for me,” the other cried again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That to repose I did not leave the knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I now from him defend myself with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who is o’erwearied with the former fight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What had he been, renewed in might and main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he had rested till to-morrow’s light?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Right fortunate was I, as man could be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he refused my proffered courtesy!”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>Till eve they strove, nor did it yet appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had the vantage of the doubtful fray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, without light, could either foe see clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now to avoid the furious blows; when day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was done, again the courteous cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his illustrious opposite ‘gan say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“What shall we do, since ill-timed shades descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While we with equal fortune thus contend?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Meseems, at least, that till to-morrow’s morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twere better thou prolonged thy life: no right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have I thy doom, sir warrior, to adjourn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond the limits of one little night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor will I that by me the blame be born</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou no longer shalt enjoy the light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With reason to the sex’s charge, by whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This place is governed, lay thy cruel doom.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“If I lament thee and thy company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">HE knows, by whom all hidden things are spied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou and thy comrades may repose with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For whom there is no safe abode beside:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since leagued against you in conspiracy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are all those husbands by thy hand have died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For every valiant warrior of the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slain in the tourney, consort was of ten.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“The scathe they have to-day received from thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would ninety women wreak with vengeful spite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, save thou take my hospitality,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Except by them to be assailed this night.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“I take thy proffer in security,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Replied Marphisa), “that the faith so plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And goodness of thy heart, will prove no less,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than are thy corporal strength and hardiness.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>“But if, as having to kill me, thou grieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou well mayst grieve, for reasons opposite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor hast thou cause to laugh, as I conceive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor hitherto has found me worst in fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether thou wouldst defer the fray, or leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or prosecute by this or other light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold me prompt thy wishes to fulfil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where and whenever it shall be thy will!”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVI-->
			<p>
				<span>So by consent the combatants divided,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till the dawn broke from Ganges’ stream anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so remained the question undecided,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which was the better champion of the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To both the brothers and the rest who sided</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon that part, the liberal lord did sue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With courteous prayer, that till the coming day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They would be pleased beneath his roof to stay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVII-->
			<p>
				<span>They unsuspecting with the prayer complied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the cheerful blaze of torches white</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A royal dome ascended, with their guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Divided into many bowers and bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The combatants remain as stupified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On lifting up their vizors, at the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One of the other; for (by what appears)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior hardly numbers eighteen years.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Much marvels with herself the gentle dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That one so young so well should do and dare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much marvels he (his wonderment the same)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he her sex agnizes by her hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Questioning one another of their name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As speedily reply the youthful pair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But how was hight the youthful cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Await till the ensuing strain to hear.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
