<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-17" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Charles goes, with his, against King Rodomont.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gryphon in Norandino’s tournament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does mighty deeds; Martano turns his front,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Showing how recreant is his natural bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And next, on Gryphon to bring down affront,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stole from the knight the arms in which he went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hence by the kindly monarch much esteemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Gryphon scorned, whom he Martano deemed.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>God, outraged by our rank iniquity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whenever crimes have past remission’s bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That mercy may with justice mingled be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has monstrous and destructive tyrants crowned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gifted them with force and subtlety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A sinful world to punish and confound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marius and Sylla to this end were nursed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rome with two Neros and a Caius<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-212" id="noteref-212" epub:type="noteref">212</a> cursed;</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Domitian and the latter Antonine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, lifted from the lowest rabble’s lees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To imperial place and puissance, Maximine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence Thebes to cruel Creon bent her knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mezentius ruled the subject Agiline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fattening his fields with blood. To pests like these</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our Italy was given in later day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Lombard, Goth, and Hun a bleeding prey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>What shall I of fierce Attila, what say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of wicked Ezzeline, and hundreds more?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom, because men still trod the crooked way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God sent them for their pain and torment sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of this ourselves have made a clear assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well as those who lived in days of yore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Consigned to ravening wolves, ordained to keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Us, his ill-nurturing and unuseful sheep;</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>Who, as if having more than served to fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their hungry maw, invite from foreign wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond the mountain, wolves of greedier will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With them to be partakers of their food.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bones which Thrasymene and Trebbia fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Cannae, seem but few to what are strewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On fattened field and bank, where on their way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Adda and Mella, Ronco and Tarro stray.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>Now God permits that we should feel the spite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of people, who are haply worse than we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For errors multiplied and infinite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And foul and pestilent iniquity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The time will come we may such ill requite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon their shores, if we shall better be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And their transgressions ever prove above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The long endurance of <b>Eternal Love</b>.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>The Christian people then God’s placid front</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must have disturbed with their excesses sore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since them with slaughter, rape, and rapine hunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through all their quarters, plundering Turk and Moor:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the unsparing rage of Rodomont</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proves worse than all the ills endured before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I said that Charlemagne had made repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In search of him towards the city square.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>Charles, by the way, his people’s butchery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beholds⁠—burnt palaces and ruined fanes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sees large portion of the city lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In unexampled wreck.⁠—“Ye coward trains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither in heartless panic would ye fly?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will none his loss contemplate? what remains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To you⁠—what place of refuge, say, is left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If this from you so shamefully be reft?</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Then shall one man alone, a prisoned foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who cannot scale the walls which round him spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unscathed, unquestioned, from your city go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When all are by his vengeful arm laid dead?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus Charlemagne, whose veins with anger glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shame, too strong to brook, in fury said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the spacious square made good his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he beheld the foe his people slay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>Thither large portion of the populace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Climbing the palace roof, had made resort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For strongly walled, and furnished was the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With ammunition, for their long support.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont, mad with pride, had, in his chace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the scared burghers, singly cleared the court;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with one daring hand, which scorned the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brandished the sword;⁠—his other wildfire hurled;</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>And smote and thundered, ’mid a fearful shower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the sublime and royal house’s gate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To their life’s peril, crumbling roof and tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is tost by them that on the summit wait:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor any fears to ruin hall or bower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But wood and stone endure one common fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And marbled column, slab, and gilded beam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By sire and grandsire held in high esteem.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-213" id="noteref-213" epub:type="noteref">213</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rodomont stands before the portal, bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With steel, his head and bust secured in mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like to a serpent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-214" id="noteref-214" epub:type="noteref">214</a> issued into light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having cast off his slough, diseased and stale:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who more than ever joying in his might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Renewed in youth, and proud of polished scale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Darts his three tongues, fire flashing from his eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While every frighted beast before him flies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor bulwark, stone, nor arbalest, nor bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor what upon the paynim smote beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sufficed to arrest the sanguinary foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who broke and hewed, and shook that portal wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in his fury let such day-light through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas easy to espy⁠—and might be spied⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In visages o’ercast in death-like sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That full of people was the palace court.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Through those fair chambers echoed shouts of dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And feminine lament from dame distrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grieving, through the house, pale women fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who wept, afflicted sore, and beat their breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hugged the door-post and the genial bed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-215" id="noteref-215" epub:type="noteref">215</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too soon to be by stranger lords possest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The matter in this state of peril hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When thither came the king, his peers among.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Charles turned him round to these, of vigorous hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he had found in former peril true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Are you not those that erst with me did stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Gainst Agolant in Aspramont? In you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is vigour now so spent, (he said), the band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who <em>him</em>, Troyano, and Almontes slew,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-216" id="noteref-216" epub:type="noteref">216</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hundreds more, that you now fear to face</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One of that very blood, that very race?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Why should I now in contest with the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less strength in you behold than them? Your might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon this hound (pursued the monarch) show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This hound who preys on man.⁠—A generous sprite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thought of death⁠—approach he fast or slow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that he dies but well, holds cheap and light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But where you are, I doubt my fortune ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For by your succour, have I conquered still.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>This said, he spurred his courser, couched his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And charged the paynim; nor of life less free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Ogier joined the king in his career;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Namus and Oliver; and, with the three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Avino, Avolio, Otho, and Berlinghier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For one without the rest I never see)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the bosom, flanks, and on the front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All smote together at King Rodomont.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>But let us, sir, for love of Heaven, forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of anger and of death the noisome lore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be it deemed that I have said enow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this while, of that Saracen, not more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cruel than strong; ’tis time in trace to go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Gryphon, left with Origille, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Damascus’ gate, and him who with her came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The adulterer, not the brother of the dame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Of all the cities under eastern skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Most wealthy, populous, and fairly dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis said, Damascus is; which distant lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Salem seven days’ journey; its fair site,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fertile plain, abundant fruits supplies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Winter and summer, sojourn of delight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shading the city from the dawning day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mountain intercepts its early ray.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Two crystal streams the wealthy city scower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose currents, parted into many a rill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Infinite gardens, never bare of flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or stript of leaf, with grateful murmur fill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis said the perfumed waters are of power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So plenteously they swell) to turn a mill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that whoever wander through the streets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scent, issuing from each home, a cloud of sweets.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>Then the high-street gay signs of triumph wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Covered with showy cloths of different dye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which deck the walls, while sylvan leaves in store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scented herbs upon the pavement lie.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-217" id="noteref-217" epub:type="noteref">217</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Adorned is every window, every door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With carpeting and finest drapery;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But more with ladies fair, and richly drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In costly jewels and in gorgeous vest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Within the city gates in frolic sport,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many are seen to ply the festive dance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here the burghers of the better sort</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon their gay and well-trapt coursers prance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fairer show remains; the sumptuous court</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of barons bold and vassals, who advance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Garnished with what could be procured, of ore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pearl, from Ind and Erythraean shore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Forward Sir Gryphon pricked, with his array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surveying, here and there, the whole at ease;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When them a knight arrested by the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (such his wont and natural courtesies)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Obliged beneath his palace-roof to stay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he let nought be wanting which might please;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And chearfully the guests, with bath restored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next welcomed at his costly supper-board;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And told “how he, who, Norandino hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Damascus and all Syria’s kingdom swayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Native and foreigner had bade invite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On whom the sword of knighthood had been laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a fair joust, which at the morrow’s light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ensuing, in the square was to be made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where they might show, and without further faring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If they had valour equal to their bearing.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Gryphon, though he came not that joust to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accepts the challenge of the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For when occasion serves, it cannot be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An evil use to make our worth appear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then questioned more of that solemnity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“If ’twere a wonted feast, held every year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or new emprise; by which, in martial course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch would assay his warriors’ force.”⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“The gorgeous feast our monarch will display</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each fourth succeeding moon,” the baron said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“This is the first that you will now survey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None have been held beside. The cause which bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The solemn usage is, that on such day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king from sovereign peril saved his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After four months, consumed in doleful wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid tears and groans, with death before his eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Our monarch, who is named king Norandine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Fully to you the matter to recite),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through many and many a year for her did pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above all other damsels fair and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king of Cyprus’ daughter; whom, in fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Espoused, he, with his bride, and dame, and knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wait upon her home, a fair array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards his Syrian realm had shaped his way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“But as we scoured the fell Carpathian sea,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-218" id="noteref-218" epub:type="noteref">218</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With flowing sheet, at distance from the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A storm assailed us, of such cruelty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tempest even scared our pilot hoar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drifting three days and nights at random, we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our devious course ’mid threatening waves explore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, wet and weary, land ’mid verdant hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between well-shaded and refreshing rills.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“We our pavilions pitch, and, ’mid those groves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Joyfully strain our awnings overhead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And kitchens there construct, and rustic stoves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And carpets for the intended banquet spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile through neighbouring vale the monarch roves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And secret wood, scarce pervious to the tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeking red deer, goat, fallow-buck, and doe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, following him, two servants bear his bow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“While, with much solace, seated in a round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We from the chace expect our lord’s return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approaching us along the shore, astound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The orc, that fearful monster, we discern.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God grant, fair sir, he never may confound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your eyesight with his semblance foul and stern!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better it is of him by fame to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than to behold him by approaching near.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“To calculate the griesly monster’s height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So measureless is he) exceeds all skill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fungus-hue, in place of orbs of sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their sockets two small bones like berries fill.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-219" id="noteref-219" epub:type="noteref">219</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards us, as I say, he speeds outright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Along the shore, and seems a moving hill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tusks jutting out like savage swine he shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A breast with drivel foul, and pointed nose.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Running, the monster comes, and bears his snout</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In guise of brach, who enters on the trail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We who behold him fly (a helpless rout),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherever terror drives, with visage pale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis little comfort, that he is without</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eye-sight, who winds his plunder in the gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better than aught possest of scent and sight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wing and plume were needed for our flight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Some here, some there make off, but little gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By flying him; for swifter is the pest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than the south wind. Of forty, ten, with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swimming aboard the bark in safety rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under his arm some wretches of our train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He packed, nor empty left his lap or breast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And loaded a capacious scrip beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, like a shepherd’s, to his waist was tied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Us to his den the sightless monster carried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hollowed within a rock, upon the shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of snowy marble was that cavern quarried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As white as leaf, unstained by inky score.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him within the cave a matron tarried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who marked by grief and pain a visage wore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her were wife and maid, a numerous court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both fair and foul, of every age and sort.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Large as the other, and that grotto near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Almost upon the summit of the rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another cavern was contrived, to rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the weather fend his woolly flock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he still herded through the changeful year;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So numerous, it were hard to count his stock:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wont in due season these to pen or loose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And play the shepherd more for sport than use.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“The flesh of man he savoured more than sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this, before he reached the cave, was seen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Three youths of ours, ere yet he climbed the steep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He are alive, or rather swallowed clean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then moved the stone, which closed that cavern deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lodged us there. With that, to pasture green</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His flock he led, as wont, the meads among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sounding the pipe which at his neck was hung.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Our lord, meanwhile, returning to the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The loss which he had suffered comprehends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For in deep silence, upon every hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through empty tent and hut the monarch wends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor who has robbed him can be understand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And full of terror to the beach descends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence he his sailors in the offing sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unmoor and spread their canvas to the breeze.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“As soon as Norandino was in view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They launched and sent their pinnace to convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch thence: but he no sooner knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the fell orc, and those he made his prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then he, without more thought, would him pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And follow, wheresoe’er he bent his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To lose Lucina is such cruel pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That life is loathsome save he her regain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“When on the newly printed sand his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Norandine fixt, he with the swiftness sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With which the rage of love a man supplies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he reached the cave of which I said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where we, enduring greater agonies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than e’er were suffered, there await in dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The orc, and deem at every sound we hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The famished brute about to re-appear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“The monarch to the cave did Fortune guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the orc’s wife alone was in the lair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing the king; ‘Fly!⁠—Woe to thee!’ (she cried)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Should the orc take thee!’⁠—‘Woeful every where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I cannot choose but be,’ (the king replied)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Whether be take or miss me, kill or spare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not hither I by chance have wandered, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come with desire beside my wife to die.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>“He afterwards the dame for tidings pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those the orc had taken on the shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of Lucina above all the rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If slain or prisoner kept. With kindly lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She Norandino, in return, addressed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said ‘Lucina lived, nor need he more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have of her future safety any dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the orc on flesh of woman never fed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-220" id="noteref-220" epub:type="noteref">220</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Of this you may behold the proof in me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all these other dames who with me dwell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor me, nor them the orc offends, so we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Depart not ever from this caverned cell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But vainly who would from her prison flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hopes peace or pardon from our tyrant fell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Buried alive, or bound with griding band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of, in the sun, stript naked on the sand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘When hither he to-day conveyed your crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The females from the males he severed not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, as he took them, in confusion threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All he had captive made, into that grot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will scent out their sex; not tremble, you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest he the women slay: the others’ lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is fixt; and, of four men or six a-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be sure the greedy orc will make his prey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘I have no counsel for you how to free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady; but content thyself to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She in no danger of her life will be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who will our lot, in good or evil, share.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But go, for love of Heaven, my son, lest thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monster smell, and on thy body fare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For when arrived, he sniffs about the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, such his subtle scent, can wind a mouse.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“To her the amorous monarch made reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘That he the cave would not abandon, ere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He saw Lucina, and near her to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than to live far from her, esteemed more dear.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Seeing that she can nothing more supply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fitted to shake the purpose of the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon a new design the matron hits.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursued with all her pains, with all her wits.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>“With slaughtered sheep and goat was evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavern filled, the numerous flock’s increase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which served her and her household as a store;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the ceiling dangled many a fleece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dame made Norandino from a hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And huge he-goat’s fat bowels take the grease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the suet all his members pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he drove his natural scent away.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“And when she thought he had imbibed the smell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the rank goat exhales, she took the hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made him creep into the shaggy fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was well covered by that mantle wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him in this strange disguise she from the cell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crawling (for such was her command) did guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, prisoned by a stone, in her retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was hid his beauteous lady’s visage sweet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Kin Norandine, as bid, took up his ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the cavern, on the greensward laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he might enter with the flock who wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Homeward; and longing sore, till evening stayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At eve he hears the hollow elder’s sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon whose pipes the wonted tune was played,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calling his sheep from pasture to their rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the fell swain who stalked behind his flock.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Think if his heart is trembling at its core,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Norandino hears the approaching strains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now advancing to the cavern door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sight of that terrific face sustains!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if fear shook him, pity moved him more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You see if he loves well or only feigns!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The orc removed the stone, unbarred the cote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the king entered, amid sheep and goat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“His flock so housed, to us the orc descended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first had care the cavern door to close:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then scented all about, and having ended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His quest, two wretches for his supper chose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So is remembrance by this meal offended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It makes me tremble yet: this done, he goes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And being gone, the king his goatish vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Casts off, and folds his lady to his breast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>“Whereas she him with pleasure should descry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, seeing him, but suffers grief and pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She sees him thither but arrived to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who cannot hinder her from being slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘ ’Twas no small joy ’mid all the woes, that.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him exclaimed Lucina, ‘here sustain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou wert not among us found to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When hither I was brought, the monster’s prey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘For though to find myself about to leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This life be bitter and afflict me sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such is our common instinct, I should grieve</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for myself; but whether thee, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of after me, the orc of life bereave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assure thyself thy death will pain me more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than mine.’ And thus the dame persists to moan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More Norandino’s danger than her own.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘A hope conducts me here,’ the monarch said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘To save thee and thy followers every one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if I cannot, I were better dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than living without light of thee, my sun!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I trust to scape, as hither I have spied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As ye shall all, if, as ourselves have done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To compass our design, you do not shrink</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To imbue your bodies with the loathsome stink.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The trick he told, wherewith the monster’s smell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To cheat, as first to him the wife had told:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In any case to cloathe us in the fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he may feel is issueing from the fold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As many men as women in the cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We slay (persuaded by the monarch bold)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As many goats as with our number square,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those which stink the most and oldest are.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“We smeared our bodies with the fruitful grease</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which round about the fat intestines lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cloathed our bodies with the shaggy fleece:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while from golden dwelling broke the day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now, his flock returning to release,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We viewed the shepherd, with the dawning ray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, giving breath to the sonorous reeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Piped forth his prisoned flock to hill and meads.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>“He held his hand before the opened lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest with the herd we issued from the den,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stopt us short; but feeling wool or hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon our bodies, let us go again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By such a strange device we rescued were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cloathed in our shaggy fleeces, dames and men:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor any issuing thence the monster kept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till thither, sore alarmed, Lucina crept.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Lucina⁠—whether she abhorred the scent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, like us others, loathed herself to smear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Or whether with a slower gait she went</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than might like the pretended beast’s appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Or whether, when the orc her body hent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her dread so mastered her, she screamed for fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Or that her hair escaped from neck or brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was known; nor can I well inform you how.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“So were we all intent on our own case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We for another’s danger had no eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, turning at the scream. I saw uncase</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already her whom he had made his prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And force her to the cavern to retrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her steps: we, couching in our quaint disguise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wend with the flock, where us the shepherd leads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through verdant mountains, into pleasant meads.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“There we awaited, till beneath the shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Secure, we saw the beaked orc asleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When one along the shore of ocean made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one betook him to the mountain steep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Norandine his love alone delayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would return disguised among the sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor from the place depart, while life remained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless his faithful consort he regained.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“For when before, on the flock issuing out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He saw her prisoned in the cave alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the orc’s wide throat he was about</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To spring; so grief had reason overthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he advanced even to the monster’s snout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, but by little, scaped the grinding stone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet him the hope detained amid the flock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trusting to bear Lucina from the rock.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>“The orc, at eve, when to the cave again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He brings the herd, nor finds us in the stall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knows that he must supperless remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lucina guilty of the whole does call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Condemned to stand, fast girded with a chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In open air, upon the summit tall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king who caused her woes, with pitying eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Looks on, and pines⁠—and only cannot die.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Morning and evening, her, lamenting sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ever the unhappy lover might survey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time he grieving went afield before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The issuing flock, or homeward took his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, with sad face, and suppliant evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Signed that for love of Heaven he would not stay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since there he tarried at great risk of life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor could in any thing assist his wife.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“So the orc’s wife, as well upon her side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Implored him to depart, but moved him nought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To go without Lucina he denied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And but remained more constant in his thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this sad servitude he long was tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Love and Pity bound: till Fortune brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A pair of warriors to the rocky won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso, and Agrican’s redoubted son:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-221" id="noteref-221" epub:type="noteref">221</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Where, with their arms so wrought the champions brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They freed Lucina from the chains she wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Though he Wit less than Fortune served in save)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And running to the sea their burden bore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her to her father, who was there, they gave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This was at morn, when in the cavern hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mixt with the goats, king Norandino stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which ruminating, chewed their grassy food:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“But when, at day-light, ’twas unbarred, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He was instructed that his wife was gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the orc’s consort told the tale, and how,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In every point, the thing rehearsed was done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thanked his God, and begged, with promised vow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, since ’twas granted her such ill to shun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would direct his wife to some repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence he might free her, by arms, gold, or prayer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Together with the flat-nosed herd his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He took, and for green meads rejoicing made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He here expected, till the monster lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extended, underneath the gloomy shade:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then journeyed all the night and all the day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till, of the cruel orc no more afraid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He climbed a bark on Satalia’s strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, three days past, arrived on Syrian land.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“In Cyprus, and in Rhodes, by tower and town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which in near Egypt, Turkey, or Afric lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king bade seek Lucina up and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor could hear news of her till the other day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other day, his father-in-law made known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had her safe with him. What caused her stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Nicosià was a cruel gale</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had long time been adverse to her sail.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The king, for pleasure of the tidings true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prepares the costly feast in solemn state;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And will on each fourth moon that shall ensue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make one, resembling this we celebrate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pleased of that time the memory to renew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he, in the orc’s cavern, had to wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—For four months and a day⁠—which is to-morrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he was rescued from such cruel sorrow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The things related I in part descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from him, present at the whole, heard more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Norandine, through calend and through ide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pent, till he changed to smiles his anguish sore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if from other you hear aught beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say, he is ill instructed in his lore.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Syrian gentleman did thus display</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The occasion of that feast and fair array.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Large portion of the night, in like discourse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was by those cavaliers together spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who deemed that Love and Pity’s mickle force</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was proved in that so dread experiment;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then rising, when the supper’s sumptuous course</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was cleared, to good and pleasant lodgings went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as the ensuing morning fairly broke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sounds of triumph and rejoicing woke.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>The circling drums’ and trumpets’ echoing strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assemble all the town within the square;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now, when mixt with sound of horse and wain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loud outcries through the streets repeated are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Gryphon dons his glittering arms again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A panoply of those esteemed most rare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose mail, impassable by spear or brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, the white fay, had tempered with her hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The man of Antioch in his company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed him (a recreant worse than he was none),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Provided by their landlord’s courtesy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sturdy spears and good, the course to run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with his kindred, a fair chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bring the warriors to the square is gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With squires afoot and mounted upon steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he bestowed, as aptest for their needs.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>They in the square arrived and stood aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor of themselves awhile would make display;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better to see the martial gallants ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By twos and threes, or singly, to the fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One told, by colours cunningly allied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His joy or sorrow to his lady gay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One, with a painted Love on crest or shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she were cruel or were kind, revealed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>It was the Syrians’ practise in that age</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To arm them in this fashion of the west.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply this sprung out of their vicinage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And constant commerce with the Franks, possest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In those days of the sacred heritage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That God incarnate with his presence blest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which now, to them abandoned by the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of wretched Christians, heathen hounds profane.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>God’s worshippers, where they should couch the lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For furtherance of his holy faith and true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against each other’s breast the spear advance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the destruction of the faithful few.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You men of Spain, and you, ye men of France,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Switzers, turn your steps elsewhere, and you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye Germans, worthier empire to acquire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that is won for Christ, which you desire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>If verily most Christian you would be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—I speak to you, that catholic are hight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why slain by you Christ’s people do I see?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherefore are they despoiled of their right?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why seek you not Jerusalem to free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From renegades? By Turkish Moslemite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impure, why is Byzantium, with the best</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fairest portion of the world, possest?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Thou Spain, hast thou not fruitful Afric nigh?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-222" id="noteref-222" epub:type="noteref">222</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And has she not in sooth offended more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Italy? yet her to scathe, that high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And noble, enterprize wilt thou give o’er.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! thou sleepest, drunken Italy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of every vice and crime the fetid sewer!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor grievest, as a hand-maid, to obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In turn, the nations that have owned thy sway.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>If fear of famishing within thy cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Switzer, does thee to Lombardy convey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thou, among our people, dost but crave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hand to give thee daily bread, or slay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Turk has ready wealth; across the wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drive him from Europe or from Greece away:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So shalt thou in those parts have wherewithal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To feed thy hunger, or more nobly fall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>I to the German neighbour of thy lair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say what I say to thee; the wealth o’ the west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Constantine brought off from Rome, is there⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brought off the choicest, gave away the rest⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-223" id="noteref-223" epub:type="noteref">223</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There golden Hermus and Pactolus are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mygdonia and Lydia: nor that country blest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which many tales for many praises note,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thou wouldst thither wend, is too remote.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Thou mighty Lion, that art charged to keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The keys of Paradise, a weighty care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh! let not Italy lie plunged in sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thy strong hand is planted in her hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To thee, his shepherd, God, to guide his sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has given that wand and furious name to bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou may’st roar, and wide thine arms extend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so from greedy wolves thy flock defend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>But whither have I roved! who evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So from one topic to the other stray?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet think not I the road I kept before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To have missed so far, but I can find my way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I said, the Syrians then observed the lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or arming like the Christians of that day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that Damascus’ crowded square was bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With corslet, plate, and helm of belted knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The lovely ladies from their scaffolds throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the jousters yellow flowers and red;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While these, as loud the brazen trumpets blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make their steeds leap and wheel and proudly tread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each, rode he well or ill, his art would show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the goring spur his courser bled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence this good cavalier earns fame and praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While others scornful hoots and laughter raise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>A suit of arms was prize of the assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Presented to the king some days before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which late a merchant found upon the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returning from Armenia; this the more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To grace, a vest, with noblest tissue gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Syrian king subjoined, so powdered o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With jewels, gold, and pearls in rich device,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They made the meed a thing of passing price.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>If the good king had known the panoply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This he had held above all others dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this had given, as full of courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be contented for with sword and spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twere long to tell who so unworthily</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had erst mistreated thus the goodly gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That lay the way the harness had been strowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A prey to whosoever past the road.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Of this you more in other place shall hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Gryphon now I tell, who at the just</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived, saw broken many a knightly spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more than one good stroke and one good thrust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eight were there who made league together, dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Norandine, and held in sovereign trust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Youths quick in arms and practised in the shock:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All lords, or scions of illustrious stock.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>At open barriers, one by one, the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They kept against all comers for a day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At first with lance, and next with sword or mace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While them the king delighted to survey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ofttimes they pierce the corslet’s iron case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every thing in fine perform in play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which foemen do that deadly weapons measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save that the king may part them at his pleasure.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>That witless Antiochite, who, worthily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By name was cowardly Martano hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thinking, because his comrade, he must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Partaker of the noble Gryphon’s might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the martial press rides valiantly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then stops; and the issue of a furious fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had begun between two cavaliers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wait, retiring from the strife, appears.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Seleucia’s lord, of those companions one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Combined in that emprize to keep the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who then a course with bold Ombruno run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wounded the unhappy warrior in mid-face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that he slew him; mourned by every one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who as a worthy knight the warrior grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And over and above his worth, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All others, hold him for his courteous lore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When vile Martano from his place discerned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fate which might be <em>his</em> with fearful eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into his craven nature be returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And straight began to think how he might fly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But him from flight the watchful Gryphon turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, after much ado, with act and cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Urged him against a knight upon the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As at the ravening wolf men slip the hound;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Who will pursue the brindled beast for ten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or twenty yards, and, after, stop to bay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he beholds his flashing eyes, and when</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sees the griesly beast his teeth display</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas thus, before those valiant gentlemen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And princes, present there in fair array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fearful Martano, seized with panic dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turned to the right his courser’s rein and head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet he who would excuse the sudden wheel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his courser might the blame bestow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, after, he so ill his strokes did deal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Demosthenes his cause might well forego.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With paper armed he seems, and not with steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So shrinks he at the wind of every blow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length he breaks the ordered champions through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid loud laughter from the circling crew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>Clapping of hands, and cries, at every turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were heard from all that rubble widely spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As a wolf sorely hunted makes return</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To earth, to his retreat Martano fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gryphon remained, and sullied with the scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteemed himself, which on his mate was shed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rather than be there, he, in his ire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would gladly find himself i’ the midst of fire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>With burning heart, and visage red with shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thinks the knight’s disgrace is all his own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because by deeds like his with whom he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He weens the mob expects to see him known.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that it now behoves his valour flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More clear than light, or they, to censure prone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Errs he a finger’s breadth⁠—an inch⁠—will swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His fault, and of that inch will make an ell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Already he the lance upon his thigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has rested, little used to miss the foe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then makes with flowing rein his courser fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next, somedeal advanced, directs the blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, smiting, puts to the last agony</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sidonia’s youthful lord, by him laid low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’ercome with wonder each assistant rises,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom sore the unexpected deed surprises.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Gryphon returned, and did the weapon wield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whole and recovered, which he couched before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in three pieces broke it on the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which bold Laodicèa’s baron bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thrice of four times about to press the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He seemed, and lay along the crupper, sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astound; yet rose at length, unsheathed his blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wheeled his good courser, and at Gryphon made.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>Gryphon, who in his saddle sees the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Advancing towards him, nor unseated by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The encounter, says; “The failure of the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a few strokes the sabre shall supply;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on his temples smote a stroke so shear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seemed that it descended from the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And matched it with another, and again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another, till he stretched him on the plain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Here two good brothers of Apamia were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In tourney wont to have the upper hand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Corimbo named and Thyrsis was the pair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both overturned by Gryphon on the land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One at the encounter left his saddle bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the other Gryphon used his trenchant brand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><em>This</em> valiant knight was, in the common trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sure to obtain the honours of the just.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Bold Salinterno, mid the warlike train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was in the lists, vizier and marshal hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had the government of all that reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was, withal, a puissant man of might:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tourney’s prize he sees, with much disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About to be borne off by foreign knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lance he snatches, and to Gryphon cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him with many menaces defies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But he makes answer with a massy spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of ten others chosen as the best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And levelling at the buckler of the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For greater surety, pierces plate and breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twixt rib and rib, it bored the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Issuing a palm behind. To all the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king excepted, welcome was the blow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For each was greedy Salinterno’s foe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Two of Damascus next Sir Gryphon sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hermophilo and Carmondo. <em>This</em>, arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under his flag, the king’s militia led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><em>That</em> was as lord high admiral obeyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><em>This</em> lightly at the shock on earth was shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And <em>that</em>, reversed, upon the ground o’erlaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By his weak horse, too feeble to withstand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Gryphon’s mighty push and puissant hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet in the field remained Seleucia’s knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The best of all the other seven at need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one who well accompanied his might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With perfect armour and a gallant steed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both at the helmet, where it locks, take sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with their spears to the encounter speed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Gryphon hardest smote, whose paynim foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lost his left stirrup, staggered by the blow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>They cast the truncheons down, their coursers wheel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, full of daring, with drawn falchions close.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Gryphon was the first a stroke to deal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which might have split an anvil; at the blow’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descent, the shield is splintered⁠—bone and steel⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This had its lord mid thousand others chose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, but ’twas double, and the coat as well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sword had cleft the thigh on which it fell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>He of Seleucia at Sir Gryphon’s casque,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the same time, so fell a blow addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It would have rent and torn the iron mask,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had it not been enchanted like the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim’s labour is a fruitless task,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of arms so hard Sir Gryphon is possest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who has the foe’s already cleft and broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In many parts, nor thrown away a stroke.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Each one might see how much Seleucia’s lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was overmatched by Gryphon, and that day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The worsted men had perished by the sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had not the monarch quickly stopt the fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his guard king Norandino spake the word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bade them enter, and the duel stay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They part the knight, whom they asunder bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And much the king is lauded for his care.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The eight, who had to keep the field pretended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From all the world, nor yet their part had done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On a sole knight⁠—their quarrel ill defended⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had vanished from the tilt-yard one by one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The others, who with them should have contended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood idle; for to answer them was none.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since Gryphon had forestalled, in the debate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What they should all have done against those eight;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>And, for such little time endured the play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less than an hour sufficed to finish all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Norandine, the pastime to delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to continue it till even-fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descending from his place, bade clear the way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the huge squad divided, at his call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into two troops, whom, ranked by blood and might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch formed, and marched for other fight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Sir Gryphon, during this, had made return</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Homeward, with anger and with fury stung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less thinking of his honours that the scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which on the vile Martano had been flung.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence, from himself the opprobrious shame to turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Martano now employs his lying tongue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she, the false and cunning courtezan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assists him in his scheme as best she can.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Whether the youth believed the tale or no,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He the excuse received, like one discreet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deemed it best for them at once to go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And secretly and silently retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For fear, that if the populace should know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Martano base, they him might ill entreat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, by short ways and close, they quit the abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And issue from the gates upon their road.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Sir Gryphon, was he or his horse foredone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With toil, or was it sleep his eyes down-weighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere yet the troop beyond two miles had gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the first inn upon the highway stayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He doffed his armour all, and morion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had the steeds of trappings disarrayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next alone he to a chamber sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Locked himself in, undrest, and went to bed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIX-->
			<p>
				<span>No sooner he his head had rested there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than, with deep sleep opprest, he closed his eye:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So heavily, no badgers in their lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or dormice, overcome with slumber, lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Martano and Origille, to take the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Entered this while a garden which was nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there the strangest fraud together bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which ever entered into mortal head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CX-->
			<p>
				<span>Martano schemed to take away the steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gear, in which Sir Gryphon had been dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stand before the monarch, in the weed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of him who had in joust so proved his might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he had shaped in thought, he did the deed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He took away the warrior’s horse, more white</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than milk, his buckler, surcoat, arms, and crest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all Sir Gryphon’s knightly ensigns drest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXI-->
			<p>
				<span>He, who was clad in trappings not his own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like the ass mantled in the lion’s hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he expected, to the king, unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was called in place of Gryphon: when descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Norandine, he rising from his throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embraced and kissed, and placed him by his side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor deems enough to praise and hold him dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But wills that all around his praise should hear:</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXII-->
			<p>
				<span>And bids them the sonorous metal blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proclaiming him the conqueror of that day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And round about loud voices, high and low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The unworthy name throughout the lists convey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He wills that, side by side, with him shall go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight, when homeward he shall take his way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him such favour shows, intent to please,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As might have honoured Mars or Hercules.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Him lodgings fair he gave, wherein to dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At court; and she who with the peer did ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was honoured by the courteous king as well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—False Origille⁠—with knight and page supplied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But it is time that I of Gryphon tell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who unsuspecting, she, or wight beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him would with treacherous stratagem deceive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had fallen asleep, nor ever waked till eve.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>When he how late it was, awaking, knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With speed he from the chamber did withdraw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hastened where he, with the other crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left Origille and her false brother-in-law:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when, nor these, nor, upon better view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His armour nor his wonted clothes he saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suspicious waxed; and more suspicion bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ensigns of his comrade left instead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXV-->
			<p>
				<span>The host, arriving, him at full possest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of every thing⁠—and how, in white array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That warrior, with the lady and the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had to the city measured back their way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By little and by little, Gryphon guessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What love from him had hidden till that day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knew, to his great sorrow, in the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Origille’s paramour, and not her brother.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Now he lamenting for his folly stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That having heard the truths the pilgrim said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He should have let her story change his mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who him before so often had betrayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He might have venged himself, nor did:⁠—now wou’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too late, inflict the punishment delayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Constrained (a crying error!) in his need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take that wily treachour’s arms and steed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>He better would have gone like naked man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than braced the unworthy cuirass on his breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or hastened the detested shield to span,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or place upon his helm the scorned crest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But of the lover, and that courtezan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, passion mastering reason, took the quest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bending to Damascus’ gate his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived an hour before the close of day.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>On the left hand a castle richly dight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood nigh the gate, to which Sir Gryphon rode.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besides, that it was strong and armed for fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Filled with rare chambers was the rich abode.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first of Syria, king, and lord, and knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lady, in a gentle group bestowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There in an open gallery fairly met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were at their glad and costly supper set.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>With the high tower the beauteous gallery, clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond the city-wall, projected out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From whence might be discovered, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The spacious fields and different roads about.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Gryphon now, in his opprobrious gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And arms, dishonoured by the rabble’s flout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes, by ill fortune, to the gate resort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He by the king is seen, and all his court;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXX-->
			<p>
				<span>And, taken for the man whose crest he wears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In dame and knight moves laughter, through the ring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vile Martano, as a man who shares</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The royal grace, sits next below the king;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next, she, whom her love so fitly pairs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom Norandino gaily questioning.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Demands of them, who is the coward knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That of his honour makes so passing light;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Who, after feat so base and foul, anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approaches, with such front and shameless cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—And cries, “It seems a thing unheard, that you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An excellent and worthy cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should take this man for your companion, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has not in all our wide Levant his peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did you with him for contrast-sake combine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That so your valour might more brightly shine?</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“⁠—But did not love for you my will restrain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the eternal gods, I truly swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He should endure such ignominious stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As I am wont to make his fellows share:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him would I make of my long-nursed disdain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of cowardice perpetual record bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To you, by whom he hither was conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If now unpunished, let his thanks be paid.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>That vessel of all filthy vices, he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made answer: “Mighty sir, I cannot say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who is the stranger, that fell in with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Journeying from Antioch hither, by the way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But him I worthy of my company</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deemed, by his warlike semblance led astray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I nothing of his deeds have heard or seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save what ill feats to-day have witnessed been;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Which moved me so, it little lacked but I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For punishment of his unworthy fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had put him out of case again to ply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In martial tournament, the sword or spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, but in reverence to your majesty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And presence, I forbore by hand to rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not for his sake:⁠—nor by thy mercy showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On him, as my companion on the road;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Whose former fellowship appears a stain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ever ’twill sit heavy at my heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I, uninjured, see the wretch again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Scape, to the scandal of the warlike art.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twere better he from tower, a worthy pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were gibbeted, than suffered to depart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hung as a beacon for the coward’s gaze.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such were a princely deed, and worthy praise.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>A voucher he in Origilla had,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who well, without a sign, his purpose read.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I deem not,” cried the king, “his works so bad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they should cost the stranger knight his head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enough that he again the people glad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For penance of his weighty sin.” This said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He quickly called a baron of his crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him enjoined the deed he was to do.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>With many armed men that baron fares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the city-gate descending, here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Collects his troop, and for the attempt prepares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waiting the coming of the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him surprises so at unawares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, softly, ’twixt two bridges, takes the peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him detains, with mockery and scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a dark chamber, till returning morn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The early sun had scarce his golden hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uplifted from his ancient nurse’s breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beginning, upon Alpine regions bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To chase the shades and gild the mountain-crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Martan’, fearing Gryphon might declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His wrong, and to the king the truth attest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Retorting upon him the slander cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Took leave, and thence upon his journey past.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>His ready wit a fit excuse supplies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why he stays not, to see the recreant shown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He is with other gifts, beside the prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rewarded for the victory, not his own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And letters patent, drawn in ample wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein his lofty honours wide are blown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let him depart; I promise he shall meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A guerdon worthy of his treacherous feat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Gryphon is brought with shame into the square,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When it is fully thronged with gazing wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom they of cuirass and of helmet bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leave in simple cassock, meanly dight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as to slaughter he conducted were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Place on a wain, conspicuous to the sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Harnessed to which two sluggish cows are seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weary and weak, and with long hunger lean.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Thronging about the ignoble car, appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brazen-faced boy and girl of evil fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, each in turn, will play the charioteer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all assail the knight with bitter blame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The boys might be a cause of greater fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, joined to mocks and mows, and words of shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior they with volleyed stones would slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that the wiser few their fury stay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>That which of his disgrace had been the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though no true evidence of guilt, his mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And plate, are dragged in due dishonour round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suspended at the shameful waggon’s tail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wain is stopt, and to the trumpet’s sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heralds, in front of a tribunal’s pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His shame, before his eyes, amid the crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Another’s evil deed) proclaim aloud.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>They take their prisoner thence, and so repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In front of temple, dwelling-house, and store;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor any cruel name of mockery spare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor leave unsaid a word of filthy lore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him at last without the city bear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The foolish rabble, trusting evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their thrall to banish to the sound of blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who passing little of its prisoner knows.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The warrior’s gyves no sooner they undo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from their manacles free either hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Gryphon seizes shield and sword, and, through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rabble, makes long furrows with his brand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With pike and spear unfurnished was the crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who without weapons came, a witless band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest for other canto I suspend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, sir, ’tis time this song should have an end.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
