<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XLIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-43" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Rinaldo from his courteous landlord hears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What folly had destroyed his every good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next learns another story, as he steers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Toward Ravenna with the falling flood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then last arrives where, conqueror o’er his foes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Orlando was, but in no joyful mood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, that the Child a Christian made whilere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Christens Sobrino, and heals Olivier.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>O execrable avarice! O vile thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of sordid gold! it doth not me astound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So easily thou seizest soul, immersed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In baseness, or with other taint unsound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that thy chain should bind, amid the worst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that thy talon should strike down and wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One that for loftiness of mind would be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthy all praise, if he avoided thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some earth and sea and heaven above us square,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Know Nature’s causes, works, and properties;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What her beginnings, what her endings are;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And soar till Heaven is open to their eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet have no steadier aim, no better care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stung by thy venom, than, in sordid wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To gather treasure: such their single scope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their every comfort, and their every hope.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Armies by him are broken in his pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gates of warlike towns in triumph past:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The foremost he to breast the furious tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fearful battle; to retire the last;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet cannot save himself from being stied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till death, in thy dark dungeon prisoned fast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of others that would shine thou dimm’st the praise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom other studies, other arts would raise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What shall of high and beauteous dames be said?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who (from their lovers’ worth and charms secure)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against long service, I behold, more staid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More motionless, than marble shafts, endure:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then Avarice comes, who so her spells hath laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see them stoop directly to her lure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Who could believe?⁠—unloving, in a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They fall some elder’s, fall some monster’s prey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not without reason here I raise this cry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Read me who can, I read myself⁠—nor so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I from the beaten pathway tread awry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor thus the matter of my song forego.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not more to what is shown do I apply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My saying, than to what I have to show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now return we to the paladine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was about to taste the enchanted wine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fain would he think awhile, of whom I speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As said) ere to his lips the vase he bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thought; then thus: “When finding what we seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Displeases, this ’tis folly to explore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My wife’s a woman; every woman’s weak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then let me hold the faith I held before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faith still has brought, and yet contentment brings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From proof itself what better profit springs?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“From this small good, much evil I foresee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For tempting God moves sometimes his disdain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not if it wise or foolish be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to know more than needs, I am not fain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now put away the enchanted cup from me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I neither will, nor would, the goblet drain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which is with Heaven’s command as much at strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Adam’s deed who robbed the tree of life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For as our sire who tasted of that tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And God’s own word, by eating, disobeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell into sorrow from felicity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was by misery evermore o’erlaid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The husband so, that all would know and see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whatever by his wife is done and said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Passes from happiness to grief and pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever can uplift his head again.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile the good Rinaldo saying so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pushing from himself the cup abhorred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beheld of tears a plenteous fountain flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the full eyes of that fair mansion’s lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who cried, now having somewhat calmed his woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Accursed be he, persuaded by whose word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! I of the fortune made assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereby my cherished wife was reft away!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wherefore ten years ago wast thou not known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that I counselled might have been of thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the sorrows and the grief begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That have nigh quenched my eyes; but raised shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The curtain from the scene, that thou upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My pain mayst look, and mayst lament with me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I to thee of mine unheard-of woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The argument and very head will show.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Above, was left a neighbouring city, pent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within a limpid stream that forms a lake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which widens, and wherein Po finds a vent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their way the waters from Benacus take.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Built was the city, when to ruin went</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Walls founded by the Agenorean snake.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-524" id="noteref-524" epub:type="noteref">524</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here me of gentle line my mother bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But of small means, in humble home and poor.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If Fortune’s care I was not, who denied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To me upon my birth a wealthy boon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nature that went with graceful form supplied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that in beauty rival had I none.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enamoured of me in youth’s early tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile was dame and damsel more than one:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I with beauty coupled winning ways;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though it becomes not man himself to praise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A sage within our city dwelled, a wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond belief, in every science great;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, when he closed his eyes on Phoebus’ light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Numbered one hundred years, one score and eight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A savage life he led and out of sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until impelled by love, the senior late</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By dint of gifts obtained a matron fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who secretly to him a daughter bare;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And to prevent the child from being won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As was erewhile the mother, that for gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bartered her chastity, whose worth alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Excels what gold earth’s ample veins contain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her he from the ways of man is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where he spies the loneliest place, his train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of demons forces, in enchantment skilled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This dome so spacious, fair, and rich, to build.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“By ancient and chaste dames he there made rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This daughter, that in sovereign beauty grew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor suffered her to see or even hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A man beside himself; and, for her view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Lest lights should lack, whereby her course to steer⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The senior every modest lady, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">E’er on unlawful love the barrier shut,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made limn in picture, or in sculpture cut.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nor he alone those virtuous dames, who, sage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And chaste, had so adorned antiquity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose fame, preserved by the historic page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is never doomed its dying day to see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But those as well that will in future age</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Everywhere beautify fair Italy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made fashion in their well-known form and mien;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As eight that round this fount by thee are seen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What time the damsel ripe for husband shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that the fruit may now be gathered, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Did chance or my misfortune so dispose?)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Am worthiest found; and those broad lands that lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without the walls which that fair town enclose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—The fishy flat no less than upland dry⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extending twenty miles about that water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He gives me for a dowry, with his daughter.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She was so mannered, was so fair of hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None could desire she other gifts should bring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So well to broider was she taught, and sew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Minerva knew not better; did she sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or play, or walk, to those that hear and view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She seems a heavenly, and no mortal thing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the liberal arts was skilled as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As her own sire, or scarce behind him fell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“With genius high and beauty no less bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which might have served the very stones to move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such love, such sweetness did the maid unite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thinking thereof meseems my heart is clove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She had no greater pleasure or delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than being with me, did I rest or rove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas long ere we had any strife; in fine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We quarrelled; and the fault, alas! was mine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Five years my consort’s father had been dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since to that yoke I stooped, and pledged my vow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When in short time (the manner shall be said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Began the sorrows that I feel even now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While me with all his pinions overspread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love of the dame, whose praises thus I blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A noble townswoman with love of me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was smit; more sorely smitten none could be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She, in all magic versed, was of such skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As never was enchantress; by her say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moved solid earth, and made the sun stand still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Illumined gloomy night and darkened day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet never could she work upon my will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The anguish of her amorous wound to allay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With salve I could not give, except with scathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of her to whom erewhile I pledged my faith.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Not because she right gentle was and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor because I believed her love so true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor for large gift, nor promise often plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet because she never ceased to sue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could she from me obtain one spark of light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From that first flame my gentle consort blew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So mates and masters every will in me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knowledge of my wife’s fidelity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I in the hope, belief, and certitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My wife to me was faithful evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should with contempt the beauty have eschewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that famed daughter which fair Leda bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the wit and wealth wherewith was wooed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The illustrious shepherd upon Ida hoar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But no repulse withal with her avails,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who me, for ever at my side, assails.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“One day that me beyond my palace sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That weird enchantress, who Melissa hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where she can discourse with me at ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She finds a way whereby my peace to blight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, goading me with evil jealousies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The faith I nursed at heart, she puts to flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She ’gan commending my intent to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faithful to her who faithful was to me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘But that she faithful is, ye cannot say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save of her faith ye have assurance true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she fails not withal, where fail she may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She faithful, modest may be deemed by you:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But is she never from your side away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is not permitted other man to view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How does this boldness come, that you would be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrant of her untried modesty?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Go forth awhile; go forth come from home alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be the bruit in town and village spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she remains behind, and you are gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let lovers and let couriers have their head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If, unpersuaded still by prayer and boon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She does no outrage to the marriage bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though doing so she deem herself unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then faithful you the dame may justly ween.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I with such words and suchlike words was plied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till so on me the shrewd enchantress wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I wished to see my consort’s virtue tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By certain proof, and to the touchstone brought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—‘Now grant we (I to that witch-lady cried)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She prove what cannot by myself be thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How by some certain token can I read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she will merit punishment or meed?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘A drinking-cup will I for that assay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give you (she said) of virtue strange and rare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such was for Arthur made by Morgue the fay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-525" id="noteref-525" epub:type="noteref">525</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make him of Genevra’s fault aware.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The chaste wife’s lord thereof may drink; but they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drink not, whose wedded partners wanton are:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, when they would the cordial beverage sup,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into their bosom overflows the cup.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Below departing, you the test shall try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, to my thinking, now shall you drink clean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For clean as yet I think your consort, I:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The event however shall by you be seen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet will I warrant not your bosom dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should you repeat the proof; for if, between</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cup and lip, the liquor be not shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You are the happiest wight that ever wed.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The offer I accept, the vase to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is given, and trial made with full success;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For hitherto (as hoped) confirmed I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My gentle consort’s worth and faithfulness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Leave her awhile (Melissa said), and be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A month or twain a truant, more or less:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then homeward wend; again the goblet fill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prove if you the beverage drink or spill.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I thought it hard to leave my consort’s side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not as so much about her truth in pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that I could nor for two days abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay, not an hour without her could remain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘⁠—You in another way (Melissa cried)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guided by me, the truth shall ascertain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Voice, vesture shall you change; and to her sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Present yourself, disguised like other wight.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sir, a fair city nigh at hand, defends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Twixt fierce and threatening horns the foaming Po;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose jurisdiction to the shore extends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the sea’s briny waters come and go:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This yields in ancientry, but well contends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With neighbouring towns in rich and gorgeous show:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A Trojan remnant its foundations placed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which scaped from Attila’s destructive waste.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-526" id="noteref-526" epub:type="noteref">526</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A rich, a youthful, and a handsome knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bridles this city with his sovereign sway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, following a lost falcon in its flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Entering by chance my dwelling on a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beheld my wife, who pleased him so at sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bore her impress in his heart away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ceased to practise on her, with intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To incline the matron to his evil bent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So often she repels the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That finally his courtship is foregone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But her fair image graved by Love will ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be razed from memory; me Melissa won</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So well she soothed and flattered) of that peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The face and figure to the sight to don;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And changed me⁠—nor well how can I declare⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In voice and visage and in eyes and hair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I, having to my lady made a show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As eastward bound and gone⁠—like him that wooed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her rich and youthful lover, altered so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His semblance, walk, voice, vest in me are viewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Homeward, attended by Melissa, go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into a page upon her side transmewed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who the most costly jewels with her bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">E’er brought form Ind, or Erithraean shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I enter safely, that my palace knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with me wends Melissa; and there I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So wholly at her ease Madonna view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No woman or attendant squire is by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her with suppliant prayer forthwith I sue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next those goads to evil deed apply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Show emerald, ruby, diamond, that might serve</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make the firmest heart from honour swerve;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And I declare to her the gift is small</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To that, which she may hope to make her own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then of the vantage speak, that from his hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her husband at the present time is gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I how long it was to her recall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since, as she knew, to her my love was shown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that my loving with such faith, in the end</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might worthily to some reward pretend.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“At first she was somedeal disturbed; became</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like scarlet; nor would listen to my say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But seeing those bright jewels flash like flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her stubborn heart was softened, and gave way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in brief speech and feeble said the dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What to remember takes my life away:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘She with my wishes, said, she would comply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If sure to be unseen of watchful eye.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Me my wife’s words like poisoned weapon thrill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pierce my suffering spirit through and through:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through bones and veins there went a deadly chill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My tongue clave to my throat: The witch withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that the magic mantle, and at will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Transformed me to mine ancient shape anew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Bethink thee of what hue my wife became,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Taken by me in such notorious shame!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Of deadly hue we both of us remain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We both stand silent; both with downcast eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So feeble is my tongue, that I with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So faint my voice, that I with pain can cry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Thou wouldst betray me then, O wife, for gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If there was one that would my honour buy!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She nought replies; nor save by tears she speaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which furrow, as they fall, her woeful cheeks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shame stings her sore, but yet in sorer wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wrath at the outrage I to her had done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so without restraint it multiplies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And into rage and cruel hate is run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fly from me forthwith does she devise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, what time from his car dismounts the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Runs to the shore, aboard her pinnace wends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all that night the stream in haste descends;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And she at morn presents herself before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him that had loved her once, the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose semblance and whose borrowed face I wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, to my shame, I tempted her whilere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him that loved, and loves her evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her coming, it may be believed, is dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From thence she bade me never entertain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hope she’d love me or be mine again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alas! with him she swells in mickle glee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even from that day, and makes of me a jest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of that evil which I brought on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I languish yet, and find no place of rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Justly this growing ill my death will be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of little remnant now of life possest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I well believe I in a year had died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that a single comfort aid supplied.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That comfort was; of all which harboured were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here for ten years (for still to every guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath my roof I bade the vessel bear)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was none but with the wine had bathed his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To have so many comrades in my care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some little soothes the griefs that so molest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou only of so many hast been wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who wouldst forbear the perilous emprize.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My wish, o’erpassing every fitting bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To know what husband of his wife should know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is cause, by me no quiet will be found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether my death be speedy of be slow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thereat at first Melissa joys; but drowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith is her light mirth; for of my woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteeming her the cause, that dame so sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I hated, I would not behold her more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Impatient to be treated with disdain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By me⁠—of her more loved than life, she said⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where she forthwith as mistress to remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had hoped, when thence the other was conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Not to behold such present, cause of pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her own departure little she delayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And went so far away, no further word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By me was ever of that woman heard.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His tale the mournful cavalier so taught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when he now had closed his history,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With pity touched, somewhile immersed in thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo mused, and after made reply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Right ill advice to thee Melissa brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who moved three thus to anger wasps; and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perceive in thee small wisdom, that wouldst sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thing which thou wouldst gladly not have found.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If she, thy wife, by avarice was inclined</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To break her faith and be to thee untrue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Muse not: nor first nor last of womankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, worsted, from such cruel war withdrew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by a meaner bribe yet firmer mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is even tempted fouler deed to do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of men, of how many we hear, that sold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their patrons and their friends for sordid gold?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“With such fierce arms thou ill didst her assail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If to behold a brave defence thou sought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knowst thou not, against gold of no avail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is stone, or steel to hardest temper wrought?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meseems that thou in tempting her didst fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than herself, that was so quickly caught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not, had she tempted thee as much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thou, thyself, hadst better stood the touch.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here ends Rinaldo, and⁠—the parley done⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rises and to his rest desires to go:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Awhile will he repose; and then be gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An hour or two before the daylight show.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But little time has Aymon’s warlike son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor idly will that little time bestow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him the mansion’s master made reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He in his house might at his pleasure lie.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For bed and bower, within, were ready dight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But⁠—would he take his counsel for his guide⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In comfort might he sleep throughout the night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet advance some miles; ‘For thou,’ he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Shalt have a pinnace, that with rapid flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And without risk shall with the current glide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Therein shalt thou all night pursue thy way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on thy journey gain withal a day.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Good seemed that proffer in Rinaldo’s eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the courteous host large thanks he paid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then for the pinnace which that lord supplies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That waits him with her crew, the warrior made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here, at full ease reclined, Rinaldo lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While with the stream his frigate is conveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, by six oars impelled, flies fast and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cleaves the water, as a bird the air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As soon as he reclines his weary head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Asleep is Mount Albano’s cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having erewhile “that they shall wake him,” said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“As soon as they Ferrara’s city near.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melara lies left of that river’s bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sermide to the right; they in their rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next leave Stellata and Figarolo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where his two horns are lowered by angry Po.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of those two horns <em>that</em> which t’ward Venice goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo’s pilot left, and took the right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then the Bodeno past. Already shows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faintly the eastern blue, and fades from sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For now Aurora from her basket throws</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All her rich flowers, and paints it red and white;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When viewing the two castles of Tealdo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again his head uplifts the good Rinaldo.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O happy town! whereof” (the warrior cried)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Spake Malagigi, having, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fixt and wandering fires of heaven espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And forced some subject spirit to appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To me foretelling that in future tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—What time with him I took his way whilere⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even to such pitch thy glorious fame should rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou from all Italy wouldst bear the prize.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So saying, in his barge he all this while</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hurries, as if the bark with pinions flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scouring the king of rivers, to that isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nearest the town;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-527" id="noteref-527" epub:type="noteref">527</a> and, though it not to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Deserted and neglected then) doth smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This yet rejoices to behold anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor makes small mirth thereat; because aware</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hereafter how adorned ’twill be and fair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Before when he with him that way had gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Malagigi, his cousin, did he hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That when seven hundred times his course had run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Circling the heaven in Aries, the fourth sphere,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-528" id="noteref-528" epub:type="noteref">528</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of islands this should be the fairest one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In sea, or pool, or river, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that who this beheld, would brook no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hear <em>that</em> praised which fair Nausicäa bore.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-529" id="noteref-529" epub:type="noteref">529</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He heard, “it in fair mansions would outdo</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That island which Tiberius held so dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And trees that in Hesperian gardens grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would yield to what this beauteous place should bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—So rare its race of beasts⁠—no fairer shew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Herded or housed erewhile by Circe were;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Venus with Loves and Graces there should sport,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor more in Gnide and Cyprus keep her court;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And so would flourish through his study and care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who will with knowledge and with power should blend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who so safely should that bright repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With circling wall and sheltering dyke defend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The united world’s assault it well might dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor call on foreign power its aid to lend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that Duke Hercules’ sire and Hercules’ son<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-530" id="noteref-530" epub:type="noteref">530</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was he by whom this marvel should be done.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So wends the warrior summing in his mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What erst to him had told his cousin wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time the sage of future things divined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereof with him he often wont devise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And aye contemplating that city blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“How can it ever be,” Rinaldo cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That in all liberal and all worthy arts</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall flourish so these waste and watery parts?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And that to city of such amplitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And beauty such a petty burgh should grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where but marsh and miry pool is viewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Henceforth should full and fruitful harvests glow?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even now I rise, to hail the gentle blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The love, the courtesy thy lords shall show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O thou fair city, in succeeding years;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy burghers’ honours and thy cavaliers’.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The grace ineffable of powers above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy princes’ wisdom and their love of right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall with perpetual peace, perpetual love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Preserve thee in abundance and delight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a defence from all the fury prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of such as hate thee; and unmask their spite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be thy content thy neighbours’ wide annoy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than thou shouldst envy other’s joy!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While thus Rinaldo speaks, so swiftly borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the quick current flies that nimble yawl;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not to the lure more swiftly makes return</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The falcon, hurrying at his lord’s recall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thenceforth the right-hand branch of the right horn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo takes; and hid are roof and wall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><abbr>St.</abbr> George recedes; recede from that swift boat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The turrets <b>of Gaibana</b> and of the Moat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Montalban’s martial lord (as it befell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thought moved thought, which others moved again)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In memory chances on the knight to dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That him at supper late did entertain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, through this city’s cause, the truth to tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath reason evermore to be in pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the magic vessel him bethinks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which shows his consort’s guilt to him that drinks;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And him bethinks therewith of what the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Related; how of all that he had tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who of his goblet drank, there was no wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But split the wine he to his lips would guide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now he repents him; now, “ ’Tis my delight,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Mutters) “that I the proof would not abide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Succeeding I should prove but what I thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not succeeding, to what pass am brought!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This my belief I deem a certainty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And faith could have but small increase in me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, if I this should by the touchstone try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My present good would little bettered be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But small the evil would not prove, if I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saw of my Clarice what I would not see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This were a thousand against one to stake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hazard much where I could nothing take.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The knight of Clermont buried in this mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who lifted not his visage from the floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mariner with much attention viewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That overright was seated at his oar:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for he deemed he fully understood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thought that prest the cavalier so sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made him (well-spoken was the man and bold)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wake from his muse, some talk with him to hold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The substance of the talk between the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was, “that the husband little wit possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, wishing to assay if she was true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had tried his wife by too severe a test:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For woman, proof to gold and silver, who,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed but with modesty, defends her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This from a thousand faulchions will defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More surely, and through burning fires will wend.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The mariner subjoined; “Thou saidest well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With gifts so rich he should not her have prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, these assaults, these charges, to repel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not good alike is every human breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not if of wife thou has heard tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For haply not with us the tale may rest)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in the very sin her husband spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For which she by his sentence should have died.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My lord should have remembered, gold and meed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have upon every hardest matter wrought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he forgot this truth in time of need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so upon his head this ruin brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah! would that he in proof, like me, a deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Done in this neighbouring city had been taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His country and mine own; which lake and fen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brimming with Mincius’ prisoned waters, pen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I of Adonio speak, that in a hound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A treasure on the judge’s wife conferred.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Thereof,” replied the paladin, “the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath not o’erpast the Alps: for never word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of this neighbouring France, nor in my round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through far and foreign countries have I heard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So tell, if telling irks not,” said the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“What willingly I bown myself to hear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The boatman then; “Erewhile was of this town</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One Anselm, that of worthy lineage came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A wight that spent his youth in flowing gown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Studying his Ulpian: he of honest fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beauty, and state assorting with his own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A consort sought, and one of noble name:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor vainly; in a neighbouring city, crowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With superhuman beauty, one he found.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She such fair manners and so graceful shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She seems all love and beauty; and much more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perchance than maketh for her lord’s repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then well befits the reverend charge he bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, wedded, strait in jealousy outgoes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All jealous men that ever were before:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet she affords not other cause for care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that she is too witty and too fair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“In the same city dwelt a cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Numbered that old and honoured race among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sprung from the haughty lineage, which whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of the jaw-bone of a serpent sprung:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence Manto,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-531" id="noteref-531" epub:type="noteref">531</a> doomed my native walls to rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descended, and with her a kindred throng.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavalier (Adonio was he named)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was with the beauties of the dame inflamed;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And for the furtherance of his amorous quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To grace himself, began his wealth to spend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without restraint, in banquet and in vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what might most a cavalier commend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he Tiberius’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-532" id="noteref-532" epub:type="noteref">532</a> treasure had possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He of his riches would have made an end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I well believe two winters were not done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere his paternal fortune was outrun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The house erewhile, frequented by a horde</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Morning and evening⁠—of so many friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is solitary; since no more his board</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the partridge, quail, and pheasant bends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that once noble troop upon the lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save beggars, hardly any one attends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ruined, at length he thinks he will begone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To other country, where he is unknown.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He leaves his native land with this intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor letteth any his departure know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And coasts, in tears and making sad lament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The marshes that about his city go:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He his heart’s queen, amid his discontent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile forgets not, for this second woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! him another accident that falls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From sovereign woe to sovereign bliss recalls!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He saw a peasant who with heavy stake</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote mid some sapling trunks on every side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Adonio stopt, and wherefore so he strake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Asked of the rustic, that in answer cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Within that clump a passing ancient snake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid the tangled stems he had espied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A longer serpent and more thick to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He never saw, nor thought to see anew;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘And that from thence he would not wend his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until the reptile he had found and slain.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When so Adonio heard the peasant say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He scarce his speech with patience could sustain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye reverence to the serpent wont to pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The honoured ensign of his ancient strain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In memory that their primal race had grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile from serpent’s teeth by Cadmus sown;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And by the churl the offended knight so said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And did withal, he made him quit the emprize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving the hunted serpent neither dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor injured, nor pursued in further wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, where he believes would least have spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The story of his woe, Adonio hies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in discomfort and in sorrow wears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far from his native land, seven weary years.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Neither for distance nor for straitened cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which will not let Thought run its restless round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ceased Love, so wont to rein the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye to inflame his heart, aye vex his wound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length those beauties, to his eyes so dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Parforce must he revisit, homeward bound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unshorn, afflicted, he, in poor array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither returns, from whence he went his way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My city, at the time whereof I tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Rome was fain to send an embassy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That sometime near his holiness should dwell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for how long a time could none foresee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon our judge the lot of envoy fell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O day, that ever wept by him will be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be excused, Anselmo promised, prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bribed; but at the last parforce obeyed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“As no less cruel and less hard to abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He deemed a woe which caused such piteous smart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than had he seen a hostile hand his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lay bare, and from his bosom pluck his heart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dead-white with jealous fear his cheek is dyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through doubt of his fair consort while apart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the mode he deems may best avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He supplicates her not in faith to fail,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Nor beauty,’ to his wife the husband cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Nor noble blood, nor fortune, are enow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make a woman to true honour rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save chaste in name and deed;’ subjoining how</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘The virtue that mankind most highly prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is that which triumphs after strife; and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through his long absense, a fair field and wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is opened where that virtue may be tried.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“With such persuasions, and with many more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anselm exhorts the lady to be true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His going doth his woful wife deplore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O heaven, what tears, what loud complaints ensue!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Immersed in her despair, that lady swore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sooner the sun bedimmed the world should view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than she would break her faith; she would expire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sooner than she would cherish such desire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Though to the lady’s promise and protest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He lent belief, and somewhat calmed his fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he further hear he will not rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And till he can find matter for his tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A soothsayer he among his friends possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prized for his knowledge, as the first of seers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who of all witchery and of magic art</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had read the whole, or read the greater part.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“To him before departing does he pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take the charge upon himself to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If true would be Argìa while away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So name his consort), or the contrary.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Won by his prayers, he takes the time o’ the day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Figures the heavens as they appear to be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anselmo left him at his work, and came</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His answer on the following day to claim.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The astrologer is silent, loath to expose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A matter that will work the doctor woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would excuse himself with many a gloze:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when he sees, he would the evil know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Argìa will break faith with him,’ he shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘As soon as he shall from his threshold go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor prayer shall soften her, nor beauty fire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Corrupted will she be by gain and hire.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When to Anselmo’s early doubt and fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are joined the threatnings of the signs above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How stands his heart may well to thee appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thou hast known the accidents of love;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And worse than every woe, wherewith whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The afflicted spirits of that husband strove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is that it by the prophet is foretold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Argìa’s honour will be bought and sold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now to support his wife, as best he may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From falling into such an evil deed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For man, alas, will sometimes disarray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The altar, when he finds himself in need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What gold and gems the judge had put away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(A plenteous store) he leaves; and field and mead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rents, fruits, and all possessions whatsoe’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaves to his consort; all his worldly gear:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘With power,’ he said, ‘not only without measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These, as thou needest, to enjoy and spend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But do with them according to thy pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Consume and fling away, and give and vend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Other account I ask not of my treasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If such as now I find thee in the end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But such as now remain;⁠—at thy command</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Even shouldst thou squander both) are house and land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Unless she heard he thither made repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He prayed that she would dwell not in the town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But would a farm of his inhabit, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She might with all convenience live alone.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this besought he of his consort fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As thinking, that the rustics, which on down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pasture their flocks, or fruitful fallows till,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could ne’er contaminate her honest will.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Her fearful husband still embracing close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her arms about his neck Argìa threw:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A burst of tears her visage overflows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For from her eyes two streams their way pursue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She grieves, ‘he guilty should his wife suppose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if she hath already been untrue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For his suspicion to its source she traced;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in her faith no faith Anselmo placed.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Citing their long farewell, I should exceed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘⁠—To thee at length,’ he so the dame addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘I recommend my honour;’⁠—and indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Took leave, and on his road in earnest prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And truly felt, on wheeling round his steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if his heart was issuing from his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She follows him as long as she can follow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With eyes whose tears her furrowed visage hollow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Poor, pale, unshorn, and wretched (as whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To you in former strain by me was said),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Homeward meanwhile the wandering cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping he there should be unknown, had made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside the lake that pilgrim journeyed, near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The city, where he gave the serpent aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that thick brake besieged by village swain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with his staff the reptile would have slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Arriving here, upon the dawn of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For yet some stars were glimmering in the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approaching him, in foreign vesture dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Along the shore, a damsel he espies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though neither squire nor waiting-wench in sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appears, yet noble is the lady’s guise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With pleasing visage she Adonio boards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then breaks silence in the following words.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Albeit thou know’st me not, O cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am thy kin, and greatly bound to thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am thy kin; for of the lineage clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Derived of haughty Cadmus’ seed are we.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am the fairy Manto, that whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laid the first stone of this rude villagery;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (as thou haply mayst have heard it famed)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mantua from me the rising town was named.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O’ the fairies am I one; with that to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our fatal state, and what it doth import:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We to all other kinds of ill below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are subject by our natal influence, short</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of death; but with immortal being such woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is coupled, death is not of direr sort.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For every seventh day we all must take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By certain law, the form of spotted snake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘So sad it is that loathsome coil to fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prone, at length, upon the ground to crawl;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equal to this here is no worldly ill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that immortal life is cursed by all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thou the debt I owe thee (for my will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is to inform thee of its cause withal)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shalt know as well; how on that fatal day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of change we are to countless ills a prey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘So hated as the serpent beast is none;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And we that wear its evil form, alarm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outrage, and war endure from every one:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all that see us, hunt and do us harm:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless we can to ground for shelter run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We feel how heavy falls man’s furious arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Happier it were to die, than languish⁠—broke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Battered, and crippled by the cruel stroke.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘My mighty obligation due to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is that, when once thou didst this greenwood thread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou from a rustic’s fury rescuedst me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whose ill handling was I sore bested.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for thine aid, I should not have got free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without a broken spine or battered head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With body crooked and crushed I should have lain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit I could not by his arm be slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Because thou hast to know upon the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We sprang from earth with scales of dragon dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Subject to us at other times⁠—to obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heavens refuse; and we are void of might:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At other seasons, at our simple say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The circling sun stands still, and dims its light:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fixt earth is moved, and in a circle wheels:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ice at our word takes fire, and fire congeals.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Now here, prepared to render thee the meed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of benefit then done to me, I stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For now, dismantled of my dragon weed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vainly no grace of me wilt thou demand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even now, thrice richer art thou by my deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than when thou heirdst erewhile thy father’s land:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now will I that henceforth thou shalt be poor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But wealth, the more ’tis spent, augment the more:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘And because with that ancient knot thou still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know, art tangled, which by Love was tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mode and order, how thou mayst fulfil</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy wishes, shall by me be signified.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now that her lord is absent, ’tis my will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My scheme without delay by thee be tried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Go forth the lady at her farm to find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without the town; nor will I say behind.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She her discourse continuing, ’gan advise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What form he to that lady’s eyes should take:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say, what vesture wear, and in what wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should speak, how tempt her; what entreaties make:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said, how she her figure would disguise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, save the day wherein she was a snake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon all others went the fairy drest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In whatsoever figure pleased her best.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She in a pilgrim’s habit clothed the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such as from door to door our alms entreat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into a dog she changed herself to sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The smallest ever seen, of aspect sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long hair, than ermine’s fur more snowy white;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And skilled withal in many a wondrous feat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards Argìa’s villa, so transmewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fairy and the knight their way pursued;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And at the labourer’s cabins in his round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stripling halts, before he stops elsewhere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And certain rustic reeds begins to sound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His dog is up, and dances to the air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dame, that hears the voice and cry rebound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is by the rumour moved to see the pair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into her court she has the pilgrim brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Anselm’s evil destiny had wrought:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And here Adonio gives the dog command;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here by that obedient dog is shown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dance of our country and of foreign land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With paces, graces, fashions of his own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And finally he does, amid that band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With winning ways what else is to be done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such attention of the admiring crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None winked their eyes, their breath they scarcely drew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Great marvel in the dame, then longing, bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That gentle dog: she one that her had nursed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With no mean offer to his master sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—‘If all the riches for which women thirst’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(To her embassadress in answer said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wary pilgrim) ‘in my bags were pursed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is not in that treasure what would boot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To purchase of my dog one single foot;’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And he, the truth of his discourse to show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into a corner took the beldam old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bade the dog in courtesy bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon that messanger a mark of gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dog obeyed, and shook himself; and lo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The treasure! which he bade her have and hold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thereto he added, ‘Thinkest thou by ought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A dog so fair and useful can be bought?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘For whatsoever I of him demand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I empty-handed never go away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now pearl, now ring will he shake from him, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now gift me with some rich and fair array.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet tell madonna he is at her command;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not for gold; for him no gold can pay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if I for one night her arms may fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him may she take and do with him her will.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So said, a gem, new-dropt, on her he prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bade her to the lady bear the boon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in the costly produce she possest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ten, twenty ducats’ value deemed the crone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She bore the message to the dame addressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And after wrought on her till she was won</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To buy the beauteous dog, ‘who might be bought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By payment of a prize which costeth nought.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Argìa somewhat coy at first appears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Partly that she her faith will not forego;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Partly that she believes not all she hears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That beldam of the dog and pilgrim show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The nurse insists, and dins into her ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘That seldom such a chance occurs below;’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And makes her fix another day to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That dog, when fewer eyes on her shall be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The next appearance which Adonio made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was ruin to the doctor; for the hound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doubloons, by dozens and by dozens, braid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of pearl, and costly jewels scattered round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that Argìa’s pride of heart was laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so much less the dame maintained her ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When she in him, who made the proffer, viewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Mantuan cavalier that whilom wooed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The harlot nurse’s evil oratory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prayer and presence of the suitor lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The occasion to acquire that mighty fee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which wretched Anselm’s absence would afford,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hope that none would her accuser be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So vanquish her chaste thoughts, she makes the accord⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accepts the wondrous dog; and, as his pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her leman yields herself a willing prey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The fruits of love long culled that cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his lady fair; unto whom the fay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Took such affection, whom she held so dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she obliged herself with her to stay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through all the signs the sun had travelled, ere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The judge had leave to wend his homeward way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He finally returned; but sore afraid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through what the astrologer erewhile had said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Arrived, his first employment is to run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To that astrologer’s abode, and crave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If shame and evil to his wife be done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Of if she yet her faith and honor save.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heavens he figured; and to every one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the seven planets its due station gave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to the judge replied ‘that it had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even as he feared, and as it was foreseen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘By richest presents tempted to forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her faith, a prey was she to other wight.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This to the doctor’s heart was such a blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor lance, nor spear, I deem, so sorely smite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be more certified he wends (although</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He is too well assured the seer is right)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To that old nurse; and, drawing her apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To learn the truth employs his every art.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He in wide circles doth about her wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping now here, now there, to spy some trace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But nought in the beginning can he find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With whatsoever care he sifts the case.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For she, as not unpractised in that kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Denies, and fronts him with untroubled face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as well taught, above a month stands out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Holding the judge ’twixt certainty and doubt.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How blest would doubt appear, had he that wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foreseen, which would be given by certainty!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When out of that false nurse at last he found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He could not fish the truth by prayer or fee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Touching no chord but yielded a false sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He shrewdly waits his time till there should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discord between the beldam and his wife:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For whereso women are, is stir and strife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And even that Anselmo waited, so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Befell; since, angered by the first despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unsought of him, to him that nurse did go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To tell the whole; and nothing hid from sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How sank his heart beneath that cruel blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twere long to say; how prostrate lay his sprite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So was the wretched judge with grief opprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He of his wits well-nigh was dispossest;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And finally resolved to die, so burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His rage, but first would kill the faithless dame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he with one destructive faulchion yearned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To free himself from woe and her from shame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stung by such blind and furious thoughts, returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anselmo to the city, in a flame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the farm despatched a follower true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charged with the bidding he was bound to do.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He bids the servant to the villa go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to Argìa in his name pretend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He by a fever is reduced so low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She hardly can arrive before his end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence without waiting escort⁠—would she show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her love⁠—she with his man must backward wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Wend with him will she surely, nor delay)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bids him cut her throat upon the way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The serving-man to call his lady went</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prepared his lord’s command on her to do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having her little dog at starting hent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She mounted and began her journey, through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dog advised of Anselm’s ill intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But bid no less her purpose to pursue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he had taken thought for her; and aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should in the time of peril be purveyed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The servant from his pathway turns aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And through bye-roads and solitary goes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Purposely lighting on a stream, whose tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Apennine into our river flows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, both of farm and busy city wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A holt, and dark and dismal greenwood grows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Silent appeared the gloomy place, and one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fitting the cruel deed which should be done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He drew his sword on her, and signified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mandate by her angry husband given;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That so she might entreat, before she died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forgiveness of her every sin from Heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not how; she vanished from his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When through her flank the blade he would have driven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vainly long time he seeks her, then remains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foiled and outscorned, for guerdon of his pains.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He all astound and with bewildered face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And full of shame, to seek his lord returns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who from the servant that unwonted case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unweeting how the thing had happened, learns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor knows the fairy Manto fills a place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About Argìa, prompt to serve her turns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because the nurse, that all the rest revealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(I know not wherefore, I), had this concealed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He knows not what to do: the outrage sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Avenged he has not, nor his pain allaid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What was a mote is now a beam; so sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It prest him; on his heart so heavy weighed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So plain is what was little known before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fears that it will shortly be displaid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At first, he haply might have hid his woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Rumour now throughout the world will blow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Full well he wots, that since his evil vein</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to his wife, unhappy wretch! hath shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not to be subject to his yoke again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She to some strong protector will have flown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to his ignominy will maintain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And utter scorn, the lady as his own:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And haply may she to some losel flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who will her paramour and pander be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For remedy; he sends in haste a band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of messengers, with letters far and nigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some of Argìa here, some there demand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor town unsearched is left in Lombardy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next he in person goes; nor any land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaves unexamined by himself or spy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet cannot he discover means or way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For learning where concealed his consort lay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The servant last he called on whom was laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ill hest, but who had served not his despite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thither by his guidance was conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where (as ’twas said) she vanished from his sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who haply lurked by day in greenwood-shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to some friendly roof retired at night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thither guided, where but forest-trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thinks to find, a sumptuous palace sees.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This while for bright Argìa in that part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fay had made with speedy toil prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An alabaster palace by her art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gilded within, without, and everywhere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So wonderful, no tongue could tell, no heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conceive, how rich within, without how fair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, which thou deemed so fair, my master’s home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is but a cottage to that costly dome.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Curtain and cloth of arras deck the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sumptuously woven and in different wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In vaulted cellar and in littered stall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only spread in latticed galleries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only spread in lordly bower and hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vase, gold and silver, gems of many dyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Carved into cup and charger, blue, red, green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And countless cloths of silk and gold are seen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He chanced upon the costly dome (as I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To you was in my story making known)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he expected not a hut to spy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And but a weary waste of woodland lone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he beheld the dome with wondering eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anselmo thought his intellects were gone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he was drunk, or dreamed that wondrous sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He weened, of that his wits had taken flight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“An Aethiop woman posted at the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With blubber lip and nostril, he descries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor will he see again, nor e’er before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had seen a visage of such loathsome guise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill-favoured⁠—such was Aesop feigned of yore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If there, she would have saddened Paradise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Greasy and foul and beggarly her vest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor half her hideousness have I exprest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Anselm, who saw no other wight beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To tell who was that mansion’s lord, drew nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the Aethiopian, and to her applied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she: ‘The owner of this house am I.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The judge was well assured the negress lied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made that answer but in mockery:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with repeated oaths the negress swears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘ ’Tis hers, and none with her the mansions shares;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘And would he see the palace, him invites</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To view it at his ease; and recommends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If there be ought within which him delights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take it for himself or for his friends.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anselmo hears, and from his horse alights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gives it his man; and o’er the threshold wends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the hag conducted, mounts from hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Below to bower above, admiring all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Form, site, and sumptuous work doth he behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And royal ornament and fair device;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oft repeats, not all this wide world’s gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To buy the egregious mansion wound suffice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him in answer said that negress old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘And yet this dome, like others, hath its price;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If not in gold and silver, price less high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than gold and silver will the palace buy;’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And she to him prefers the same request,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which erst Adonio to Argìa made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fool he deemed the woman and possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for a boon so foul and filthy prayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet ceased she not, though more than thrice represt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And strove so well Anselmo to persuade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proffering, for his reward, the palace still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She wrought on him to do her evil will.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The wife Argìa, that is hid fast by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When in such sin her husband she descries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Springs forth and saith; ‘Ah! worthy deed! which I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of doctor, that was deemed so passing wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Found in such foul and filthy work, espy!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bethink thee, if his kindling blushes rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he stands mute! why opens not thy hollow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And central womb, O earth, the wretch to swallow?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“To clear herself and shame him, doth she stun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anselmo, never ceasing to upbraid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘What pain should by thyself be undergone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this so filthy deed, (Argìa said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thou would’st take my life for having done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What Nature prompted and a lover prayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One that was fair and gentle, and who brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A gift, compared wherewith, this dome is nought?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘If worthy of one death thou deemest me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthy art thou a hundred deaths to die:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, though my pleasure might I do on thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So passing puissant in this place am I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No other or worse vengeance done shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon my side, on thy delinquency.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The give against the take, O husband, place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as ’twas granted thee, so grant me grace:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘And be there peace between us, and accord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That all be to forgetfulness consigned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor thee <em>I</em> of thy fault by deed or word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor me of mine, henceforward <em>thou</em> remind!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This seemed a goodly bargain to her lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor to such pardon was he disinclined.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus peace and concord they at home restore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And love each other dearly evermore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So said the mariner, and some brief fit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of laughter in Montalban’s master stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made his visage burn, as if ’twas lit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With fire, when of Anselmo’s shame he heard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo greatly praised Argìa’s wit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who by such quaint device had trapped that bird;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who fell into the net wherein the dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Herself erewhile had fallen, but with less shame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the sun climbed a steeper road, the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ordered the board with food to be supplied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the good Mantuan landlord overnight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Took care with largest plenty to provide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the fair town, upon the left, from sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Retired, and on the right that marish wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Argenta is come and gone, with circling walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stream into whose bed Santerno falls.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-533" id="noteref-533" epub:type="noteref">533</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then was not fair Bastìa built, deem I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which little cause of boast affords to Spain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(That there her banner has been raised on high),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And causes deeper sorrow to Romagne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence in strait line their bark, that seems to fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the right shore the boatmen drive amain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next through a stagnant channel make, that near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ravenna brings by noon the cavalier.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-534" id="noteref-534" epub:type="noteref">534</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Though oft of money he had small supply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then was the knight so well bested, he made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The weary rowers, in his courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A parting present, ere farewell was said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here changing horse and guide, to Rimini</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo rode that very eve, nor stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Montefiore till the night was done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well nigh reached Urbino with the sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Frederick was not there of gentle lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor was Elizabeth nor Guido good;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Francis Maria nor sage Leonore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would in courteous, not in haughty mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have forced so famed a paladin for more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than one short eye, with them to make abode;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As they long did, and do unto this day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By dames and cavaliers who pass that way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Since here none takes his rein, Rinaldo bends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His course an-end to Cagli; o’er the height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rifted by Gaurus and Metaurus, wends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Past Apennine, no longer on his right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Umbri and Tuscans; and at Rome descends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Rome to Ostia goes Montalban’s knight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence to the city sails; wherein a grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His pious son to old Anchises gave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There changes back; and thence in haste he goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bound towards Lampedosa’s island-shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That place of combat chosen by the foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where they had encountered Frank and Moor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo grants his boatmen no repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That do what can be done by sail and oar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with ill wind and strong the warrior strives;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, though by little, there too late arrives.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thither he came what time Anglante’s peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The useful and the glorious deed had done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had slain those paynim kings in the career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But had a hard and bloody conquest won:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dead was Sir Brandimart; and Olivier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dangerously hurt and sore, sate woe-begone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Somedeal apart, upon the sandy ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Martyred and crippled by his cruel wound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From tears could not the mournful Count refrain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When brave Rinaldo he embraced, and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How in the battle Brandimart was slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such love, such faith endeared the warrior dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor less Rinaldo’s tears his visage stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he so cleft beholds their comrade’s head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence to embrace bold Oliviero, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sits with wounded foot, he makes repair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All comfort that he could he gave; though none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could good Rinaldo to himself afford;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he came but when the feast was done:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yea after the removal of the board.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The servants wend to the demolished town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There hide the bones of either paynim lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath Biserta’s ruined domes, and nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And far, the fearful tidings certify.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At the fair conquest won by Roland’s blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sansonet and Astolpho make great cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet other mirth those warriors would have made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had Brandimart not perished; when they hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he is dead, their joy is so allayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They can no more the troubled visage clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which of them now the tidings of such woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the unhappy Flordelice shall show?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The night preceding that ill-omened day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flordelice dreamed the vest of sable grain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she had made, her husband to array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And woven with her hand and worked with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before her eyes all sprinkled-over lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With ruddy drops, in guise of pattering rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she had worked it so the lady thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then was grieved at seeing what was wrought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And seemed to say, “Yet from my lord have I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Command to make it all of sable hue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now wherefore it is stained with other dye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against his will, in mode so strange to view?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She from that dream draws evil augury;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thither on that eve the tidings flew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But these concealed Astolpho from the dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he to her with Sansonetto came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When they are entered, and she sees no show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of joyful triumphs, she, without a word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without a hint to indicate that woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knows that no longer living is her lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that her gentle heart was riven so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so her harassed eyes the light abhorred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so was every other sense astound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, like one dead, she sank upon the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She in her hair, when life returns again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fastens her hand; and on her lovely cheeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Repeating the beloved name in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all her force her scorn and fury wreaks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uproots and tears, her locks, and in her pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like woman, smit by evil demon, shrieks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or, as Bacchante at the horn’s rude sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile was seen to run her restless round.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now to the one, to the other now her prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She made for knife, wherewith her heart to smite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now she aboard the pinnace would repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That brought the corse of either paynim knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would on either, lifeless as they were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do cruel scathe, and vent her fierce despite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now would she seek her lord, till at his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She rested from her weary search, and died.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah! wherefore, Brandimart, did I let thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without me wend on such a dire emprize?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She ne’er before did thy departure see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Flordelice aye followed thee,” she cries:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Well aided mightest thou have been by me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I on thee should still have kept my eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when Gradasso came behind thee, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thee might have succoured with a single cry;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And haply I so nimbly might have made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between you, that the stroke I might have caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with my head, as with a buckler, stayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For little ill my dying would have wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anyhow I shall die; and⁠—that debt paid⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My melancholy death will profit nought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, had I died, defending thee in strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I could not better have bestowed my life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Even is averse had been hard Destiny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all heaven’s host, when thee I sought to aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least my tears had bathed thy visage, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should the last kiss thereon, at least, have laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, ere amid the blessed hierarchy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy spirit mixt⁠—‘Depart’⁠—I should have said⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘In peace, and wait me in thy rest; for there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where’er thou art, I swiftly shall repair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Is this, O Brandimart, is this the reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose honoured sceptre thou wast now to take?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With thee to Dommogire, thy fair domain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus went I; me thus welcome dost thou make?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! what hope to-day thou renderest vain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah! what designs, fell Fortune, dost thou break!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah! wherefore fear I, since a lot so blest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is lost, to lose as well the worthless rest?’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Repeating this and other plaint, so spite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fury waxed, that she in her despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made new assault upon her tresses bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if the fault was wholly in her hair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wildly her hands together doth she smite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gnaw; with nails her lip and bosom tear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I return to Roland and his peers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While she bemoans herself and melts in tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Roland with Olivier, who much requires</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such leech’s care, his anguish to allay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who, himself, some worthy place desires</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As much, wherein Sir Brandimart to lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Steers for the lofty mountain, that with fires</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brightens the night, with smoke obscures the day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wind blows fair, and on the starboard hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not widely distant from them, lies that land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With a fresh wind, that in their favour blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They loose their hawser at the close of day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In heaven above the silent goddess shows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her shining horn, to guide them on their way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the following morn before them rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pleasant shores that round Girgenti lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here Roland orders for the ensuing night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All that is needful for the funeral rite.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He, when he saw his order duly done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now the westering sun’s fair light was spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With many nobles, who from neighbouring town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At his invital, to Girgenti went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—The shore with torches blazing up and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sounding wide with cries and loud lament⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither returned where late, of life bereft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His friends, beloved in life and death, was left.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There stands Bardino, weeping o’er the bier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who under Age’s heavy burden bows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, in the tears on shipboard shed whilere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might well have wept away his eyes and brows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upbraiding skies and stars, the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like lion, in whose veins a fever glows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roars as he wreathes his wayward hands within</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His hoary hair, and rends his wrinkled skin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Upon the paladin’s return the cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Redoubled, and the mourning louder grew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando to the corse approached more nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And speechless stood awhile, his friends to view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pale, as at eve is the acanthus’ dye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or lily’s, which were plucked at morn: he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A heavy sigh, and on the warrior dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fixing his steadfast eyes, the County said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O comrade bold and true, there here liest slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who dost live in heaven above, I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rewarded with a life, thy glorious gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which neither heat nor cold can take, my woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forgive, if thou beholdest me complain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I sorrow to remain below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not to share in such delights with thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that thou art not left behind with me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alone, without thee, there is nought I may</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ever possess, without thee, that can please.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If still with thee in tempest and affray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah wherefore not with thee in calm and ease?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Right sore must be my trespass, since this clay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will not to follow thee my soul release.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If in thy troubles still I bore a burden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why am I not a partner of thy guerdon?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thine is the guerdon; mine the loss; thy gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is single; but not single is my woe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Partners with me in sorrow are Almàyn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grieving France and Italy; and oh!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How will my lord and uncle, Charlemagne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How will his paladins lament the blow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How will the Christian church and empire moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose best defence in thee is overthrown!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Oh! how thy foes will by the death of thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be freed henceforward from alarm and fear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! how strengthened paynimry will be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What hardiment will now be theirs! what cheer!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What of thy consort will become? I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even here her mourning, and her outcries hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me she accuses, haply hates, I know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that, through me, her every hope lies low.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yet by one comfort, Flordelice, is followed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His loss, for us that reft of him remain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His death, with such surpassing glory hallowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To die all living warriors should be fain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those Decii; Curtius, in Rome’s forum swallowed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cordus, so vaunted by the Grecian train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not with more honour to themselves, with more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Profit to others, went to death of yore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These sad laments and more Orlando made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all this while white friars, and black, and gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With other clerks, by two and two arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind in long procession took their way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they to God for the departed prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he would to his rest his soul convey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before and all about were torches reared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And changed to day the sable night appeared.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They raise the warrior’s bier, and ranged to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By turns that honoured weight were earl and knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pall was purple silk, with broidery rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of gold, and pearls in costly circles dight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thereon, of lordly work and no less fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cushions were laid, with jewels shining bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On which was stretched the lifeless knight in view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrayed in vest of like device and hue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A hundred men had past before the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All taken from the poorest of the town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in one fashion equally were drest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those beadsmen all, in black and trailing gown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hundred pages followed them, who prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hundred puissant steeds, for warfare bown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by those pages backed, the portly steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Went, sweeping wide the ground with sable weeds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Banners in front and banners borne in rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose fields with diverse ensignry is stained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unfurled accompany the funeral bier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from a thousand vanquished bands were gained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Caesar and for Peter’s church whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By that rare force, which now extinct remained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bucklers by other followers carried are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Won from good warriors, whose device they bear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By hundreds and by hundreds followed more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ordained for different tasks, the steps of those;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who burning torches like those others bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mantled, say rather closely muffled, goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roland in sables next, and evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His eyes suffused and red with weeping shows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor wears a gladder face Montalban’s peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At home his wound detains Sir Olivier.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The ceremonies would be long to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In verse, wherewith Sir Brandimart was mourned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mantles, black or purple, given away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The many torches which that eve were burned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wending to the cathedral, where the array</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Past on its road, were no dry eyes discerned:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All sexes, ages, ranks, in pitying mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gazed upon him so youthful, fair, and good.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He in the church was placed; and, when with vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lament the women had bemoaned the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And <i xml:lang="el-Latn">Kyrie eleison</i>, by the priestly train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other holy orisons were said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a fair ark, upraised on columns twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was reared, with sumptuous cloth of gold o’erspread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So willed Orlando; till he could be laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In sepulchre of costlier matter made:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor out of Sicily the Count departs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till porphyries he procures and alabasters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fair designs; and in their several arts</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has with large hire engaged the primest masters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next Flordelice, arriving in those parts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raises the quarried slabs and rich pilasters;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, good Orlando being gone before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is hither wafted from the Afric shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She, seeing that her tears unceasing flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that of long lament she never tires</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor she, for mass or service said, her woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can ease, or satisfy her sad desires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vows in her heart she thence will never go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till from the wearied corse her soul expires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And builds in that fair sepulchre a cell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There shuts herself; therein for life will dwell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thither in person, having courier sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And letter, Roland goes, her thence to take;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her, would she wend to France, with goodly rent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would gift, and Galerana’s inmate make;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As far as Lizza convoy her, if bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On journeying to her father; for her sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If wholly she to serve her God was willed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A monastery would the warrior build.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still in that sepulchre she dwelt, and worn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By weary penance, praying night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It was not long, ere by the Parcae shorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was her life’s thread: already on their way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were the three Christian warriors, homeward borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the isle in whose old caves the Cyclops lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sorrowing and afflicted sore in mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For their fourth comrade who remained behind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They would not go without a leech, whose skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might ease the wound of warlike Olivier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, as in the beginning it could ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be salved, is hard to heal. Meanwhile they hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The champion so complain, his outcries fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando and all that company with fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While they discoursed thereon, the skipper, moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By a new notion, said what all approved.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A hermit not far distance hence, he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lonely rock inhabits in this sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose isle none, seeking succour, vainly tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether for counsel or for aid it be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who hath done superhuman deeds; the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Restores to life; and makes the blind to see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hushes the winds; and with a sign o’ the cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lulls the loud billows when they highest toss;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And adds they need not doubt, if they will go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek that holy man to God so dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he on Olivier will health bestow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having his virtue proved by signs more clear.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This counsel pleases good Orlando so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That for the holy place he bids him steer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who never swerving from his course, espies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lonely rock, upon Aurora’s rise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Worked by good mariners, the bark was laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Safely beside the rugged rock and fell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The marquis there, with crew and servants’ aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They lowered into their boat; and through the swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And foaming waters in that shallop made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the rude isle; thence sought the holy cell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The holy cell of that same hermit hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom Rogero was baptised before.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The servant of the Lord of Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Receives Orlando and the rest on land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blesses the company in cheerful wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And after of their errand makes demand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though he already had received advice</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From angels of the coming of that band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That they were thither bound in search of aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Oliviero’s hurt,” Orlando said;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Who, warring for the Christian faith, in fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To perilous pass was brought by evil wound.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All dismal fear relieved that eremite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And promised he would make him wholly sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that no unguents hath the holy wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor is in other human medicine found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His church he seeks, his knee to Jesus bows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And issues from the fane with cheerful brows;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And in the name of those eternal Three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Father, and the Son, and Holy Ghost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On Oliviero bade his blessing be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh! grace vouchsafed to faith! his sainted host</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From every pain the paladin did free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to his foot restored its vigour lost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He moved more nimble than before, and sure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And present was Sobrino at the cure.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sobrino, so diseased that he described</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How worse with each succeeding day he grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as he that holy monk espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The manifest and mighty marvel do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disposed himself to cast Mahound aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And own in Christ a living God and true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, full of faith, with contrite heart demands</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our holy rite of baptism at his hands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So him baptised the hermit; and as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That monarch made as vigorous as whilere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At this conversion no less gladness fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On Roland and each Christian cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than when, restored from deadly wound, and well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The friendly troop beheld Sir Olivier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero more rejoiced than all that crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still in faith and grace the warrior grew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rogero from the day he swam ashore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon that islet, there had ever been.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That band is counselled by the hermit hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who stands, benign, those warlike knights between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Eschewing in their passage mire and moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wade withal through that dead water, clean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which men call life; wherein so fools delight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And evermore on heaven to fix their sight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Roland on shipboard sends one from his throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who fetches hence good wine, hams, cheese, and bread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And makes the sage, who had forgotten long</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All taste of partridge since on fruits he fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even do for love, what others did, among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those social guests for whom the board was spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They, when their strength by food was reinforced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of many things amid themselves discoursed;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And as in talk it often doth befall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That one thing from another takes its rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roland and Olivier Rogero call</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To mind for that Rogero, in such wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Renowned in arms; whose valour is of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lauded and echoed with accordant cries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not even had Rinaldo known the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him whose prowess he had proved in fight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Him well Sobrino recognized whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as with that aged man espied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he at first kept silence; for in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of some mistake the monarch’s tongue was tied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when those others knew the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that Rogero, famous far and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose courtesy, whose might and daring through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The universal world loud Rumour blew,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All, for they know he is a Christian, stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About him with serene and joyful face:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All press upon the knight; one grasps his hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another locks him fast in his embrace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet more than all the others of that band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him would Montalban’s lord caress and grace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why more than all the others will appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In other strain, if you that strain will hear.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
