<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-30" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Great feats achieves Orlando by the way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Tartar king is by Rogero slain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whom fair Bradamant, his spouse, does stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, him expecting, suffers cruel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Fate forbade, that he who wounded lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her his plighted promise should maintain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He after boldly with the brethren made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their lord Rinaldo in his need to aid.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>When Reason, giving way to heat of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Herself from hasty choler ill defends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, hurried on by blind and furious mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We with the tongue or hand molest our friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though the offence is, after, wept and rued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The penance which we pay is poor amends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! I sorrow and lament in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For what I said in other angry strain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But like sick man am I, who, sore bested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suffering with patience many and many a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When against pain he can no more make head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yields to his rage, and curses; pain give way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with it the impetuous wrath is fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which moved his ready tongue such ill to say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he is left his willful rage to rue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But cannot that which he has done undo.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Well hope I, from your sovereign courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your pardon, since I crave it, ladies bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You will excuse, if moved by madness, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rave in my passion; let your censure light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On foe, who treats me so despiteously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I could not be reduced to worser plight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who prompts what sore repents me: Heaven above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knows how she wrongs me, knows how well I love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No less beside myself than Brava’s peer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-366" id="noteref-366" epub:type="noteref">366</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I, nor less my pardon should obtain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, who by mead or mountain, far or near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had scowered large portion of the land of Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dragging that jennet in his wild career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dead as she was, behind him by the rein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, where a river joined the sea, parforce</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abandoned on the bank her mangled corse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And he, who could like any otter swim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leapt in, and rose upon the further side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold! a mounted shepherd at the brim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived, his horse to water in the tide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor when he saw Orlando coming, him</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eschewed, whom naked and alone he spied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“My jennet for thy hackney were I fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To barter,” cried the madman to the swain:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Her will I show thee, if thou wilt; who dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the river’s other margin fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At leisure may’st thou have her cured,” (he said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“And of no other fault have I to tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give me thy hackney, with some boot instead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prythee, dismount thee, for he likes me well.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The peasant, laughing, answered not a word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But left the fool and pricked towards the ford.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hearest thou not? hola! I want thy steed,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Cried Roland) and advanced with wrathful cheer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A solid staff and knotted, for his need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That shepherd had, wherewith he smote the peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose violence and ire all bounds exceed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who seems withal to wax more fierce than e’er:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cuff he levels at that rustic’s head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And splits the solid bone, and lays him dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then leaping on his horse, by different way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The country scowers, to make more spoil and wrack:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That palfrey never more tastes corn or hay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that few days exhaust the famished hack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not afoot does fierce Orlando stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who will not, while he lives, conveyance lack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As many as he finds, so many steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Their masters slain⁠—he presses for his needs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He came at last to Malaga, and here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did mightier scathe than he had done elsewhere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For now⁠—besides that the infuriate peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all its people left the country bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor (such the ravage) could another year</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The desperate havoc of the fool repair⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many houses burnt he, or cast down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sacked was a third of that unhappy town.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Departing thence, insane Orlando flees</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Zizera, a seaward town, whose site</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is in Gibraltar’s bay, or (if you please)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say Gibletar’s;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-367" id="noteref-367" epub:type="noteref">367</a> for either way ’tis hight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here, loosening from the land, a boat he sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Filled with a party; and for pleasure dight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, for their solace, to the morning gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon that summer sea, had spread their sail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hoah! the boat! put back!” the count ’gan cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was in mind to go aboard their barge:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But vainly on their ears his clamours die:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For of such freight none willingly take charge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As swiftly as a swallow cleaves the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Furrowing the foamy wave the boat goes large.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando urges on, with straightening knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whip and spur, his horse towards the sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He plunged into the waves, at last, parforce;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For vainly would he shun the waters green.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bathed are knees, paunch, and croup, till of that horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarcely the head above the wave is seen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let him not hope to measure back his course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While smitten with the whip his ears between.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Woe worth him! he must founder by the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or into Africa his load convey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor poops nor prows does Roland more descry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all have launched their shallops, which are wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that dry shore; while from his level eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their hulls the tall and shifting surges hide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spurs his horse amid the billows high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wholly resolved to reach the farther side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The courser ends his swim and life in fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drained of his strength, and drenched brimfull of brine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sinks, and would with him draw down his load</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that himself the madman’s arms upbear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sinewy arms and either palm he rowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And puffed and blew the brine before; the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Breathed softly, and the water gently flowed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well was needed weather more than fair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if the waters yet a little rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whelmed by the waxing tide Orlando dies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Fortune, that of madmen is the guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him from the water drew near Ceuta’s shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon that beach, and of those walls as wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As twice an archer’s hand could shoot at score.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For many days along the bank he hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At hazard, ever westward hurrying sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he came where on the sea-beat strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encamped a host of blacks, a countless band.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Leave we the paladin at will to stray!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To speak of him occasion will come round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Sir, what befell the lady of Catày,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who scaped, in time, from him of wit unsound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And afterwards, upon her homeward way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was with good bark and better weather bound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how she made Medoro, India’s king;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perchance some voice in happier verse may sing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To say so many things I am intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I mean not to pursue the cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Mandricardo my fair argument</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It now behoves me, in his turn, to veer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He happily enjoyed, his rival spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauty, left in Europe without peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since fair Angelica from hence had wended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And virtuous Isabel to heaven ascended.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>King Mandricardo, proud that in his right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His lady had adjudged the amorous suit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enjoys not her award with full delight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since others with him other points dispute.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By young Rogero claimed, that eagle white</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of one disastrous quarrel is the root;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another moves the king of Sericana</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the Tartar king, for Durindana.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Agramant and Marsilius strive in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With labour sore, this tangle to undo;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-368" id="noteref-368" epub:type="noteref">368</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor only cannot they persuade the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In peace and concord to unite anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But cannot make the valiant Child refrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From claiming Hector’s buckler as his due;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet Gradasso move the sword to lend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till <em>this</em>, or till <em>that</em>, quarrel have an end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rogero brooks not that in other fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His shield be braced, nor will Gradasso bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That save against himself the Tartar knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should wield the sword Orlando used to wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“See we, in fine, on whom the chance will light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Cries Agramant) and further words forbear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How Fortune rules the matter let us see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And choose him that of her shall chosen be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And⁠—would ye do what most would me delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be an obligation evermore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You shall by casting lots decide your right:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Premising, he whose lot is drawn before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other, shall upon two quarrels fight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So he who wins, on his companion’s score</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall win as well as on his own; and who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loses the battle lose alike for two.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Between Rogero and Gradasso, we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deem there is little difference, rather none;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wot whichever shall elected be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In arms will make his martial prowess known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As for the rest, let doubtful victory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descend on him whom Heaven is pleased to own!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the vanquished knight no blame shall fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But we to Fortune will impute it all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rogero and Gradasso, at this say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Agramant, stood silent, and agreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he whose lot first issued, the assay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should undertake for both in listed mead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus in two scrolls, inscribed in the same way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their names are writ as destined to succeed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These afterwards are cast into an urn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which much they shake and topsy turvy turn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A seely boy then dipt his hand and drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A billet from the vase, and if befell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thereon Rogero’s name the assistants knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Gradasso’s left behind⁠—I cannot tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How joyed renowned Rogero at the view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And can as little say what sorrow fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon Gradasso, on the other side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he parforce his fortune must abide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gradasso every thought and every deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Employs, Rogero to instruct and aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in the strife his champion may succeed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And teaches every sleight he has assayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—How best to manage sword and shield at need⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—What strokes are feints, and what with vantage made⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when he should tempt Fortune, when eschew⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reminds him, one by one, in long review.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>After the drawing lots and king’s award,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What of the day remained the champions spent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As wont, in giving tokens of regard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To this or to that other warrior sent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The people, greedy for the fight, toward</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The field is gone, and many not content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With wending thither ere the dawn of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the place of combat watch all night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The foolish rabble anxiously attends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those goodly champions’ contest for the prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A crowd which neither sees nor comprehends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Other than that which is before its eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But they who know what boots and what offends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Marsilius and Sobrino, and the wise⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Censure the fight, and monarch that affords</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A field of combat to those martial lords.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor, “what a heavy loss he would sustain”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Cease they to royal Agramant to read)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Were Mandricardo or Rogero slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thing by cruel Destiny decreed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since they, to combat against Charlemagne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of one of these alone have greater need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than of ten thousand more, amid which crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They scarce would find one champion good and true.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Agramant recognized this truth; but thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ill his royal word could be repealed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet Mandricardo and the Child besought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That they the right, conferred by him, would yield:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More; that the question was a thing of nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor worthy to be tried in martial field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prayed them⁠—would they not obey his hest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least somewhile, to let their quarrel rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Five or six months would they the strife delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or more or less, till Charles defeated were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stript of mantle, crown, and royal sway.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But each, though he would willingly forbear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And much desired his sovereign to obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood out against the Moorish monarch’s prayer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since either deemed <em>he</em> would be foully shent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to this treaty first should yield consent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But more than king, than all, who sought in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To soften Agrican’s infuriate son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauteous daughter of King Stordilane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lamented, besought him, woe-begone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besought him he would do what all would fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold by the relenting warrior done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Lamenting her, as through the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ever kept in agony and fear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alas! and what (exclaims she) can I find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which may avail to minister repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If aye, by this or that desire inclined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You don your harness to affront new foes?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What boots it to restore my harassed mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I behold one fearful quarrel’s close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against one champion moved for love of me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If one as fierce already kindled be?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Woe worth me! I was proud, with little right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So good a king, so stout a cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he should in the fierce and dangerous fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Peril his life, who now, I see to clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon a ground of strife so passing light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the same risk prepares to couch the spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You, more than love for me, to strife impels</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The natural rage, wherewith your bosom swells.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But if the love you force yourself to show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be in good earnest, that which you profess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By this I pray you, by that chastening woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which does my spirit, does my heart oppress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be not concerned, because the bird of snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, pictured on his shield, possess.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not wherefore you should joy or grieve</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he the blazoned buckler bear or leave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Much evil may ensue and little gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of the battle you to wage prepare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Small guerdon will be bought with mickle pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If from Rogero you his eagle bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if your fortune shifts on listed plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She whom you hold not captive by her hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You cause an evil with such mischief fraught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My heart is broken at the simple thought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If of small value life to you appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And you esteem a painted bird more high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least for my life’s sake esteem yours dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For one without the other shall not die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With you to die excites in me no fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With you, prepared for life or death am I:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet would I fain not die so ill content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As I should die if you before me went.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Accompanying words with tears and sighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In such, or such like speech she him did pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout that livelong night, in piteous wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping her lover’s anger to allay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Mandricardo, sucking from her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those sweet tears, glittering in their humid ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that sweet moan, from lips more deeply dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than crimson rose, himself in tears, replied.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alack! my dearest life! take thou no dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alack! for love of Heaven! of thing so light:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if (to my sole harm) with banners spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their following of the Frank or paynim rite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Agramant and Charles united led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This need not cause you matter for affright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What poor account you make of me is clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If this one, sole, Rogero breeds such fear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And yet should you remember how alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Nor had I scimetar or sword in hand)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of knights, with a spear’s truncheon overthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I singly cleared the field, an armed band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though to his shame and sorrow this he own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso tells to them who make demand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He was my prisoner in the Syrian tower:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet other than Rogero’s is his power.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Not King Gradasso will the truth deny:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sacripant knows it and your Isolier:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say King Sacripant of Circassy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Aquilant, and Gryphon, famous peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hundreds⁠—yea and more⁠—from far and nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made prisoners at that fearful pass whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Baptised or Infidel; and all by me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From prison on the selfsame day set free.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And even yet they marvel evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the great feat which I performed that day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Greater than if the squadrons of the Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Frank united I had held at bay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shall Rogero, new to martial lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me, onto to one, with scathe or scorn appay?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And me shall now this young Rogero scare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Hector’s sword and Hector’s arms I wear?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah! as I might have won you from my foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why did I not for you in arms contend?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I so had them my valour shown, I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You would have well foreseen Rogero’s end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For heaven’s sake dry your tears, nor by such woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—An evil omen for my arms⁠—offend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And learn, ’tis Honour pricks me to the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not an argent bird and blazoned shield.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So said he; and with reasons passing good</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him that dame replied, with saddest face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor only would have changed his sullen mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But would have moved a pillar from its place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She would the champion quickly have subdued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though she was gowned, he locked in iron case;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make him satisfy the Moorish lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If Agramant spake further of accord;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And had; but that Aurora⁠—on his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ushering aye the sun⁠—no sooner stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than young Rogero, anxious to display</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That rightfully he bore Jove’s beauteous bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To cut the quarrel short, and lest delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be further interposed, in act or word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where round the palisade the people close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appears in armour and his bugle blows.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When that loud sound is by the Tartar heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the proud warrior to the strife defies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more of treaty will he hear a word:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From bed upspringing, “Arms,” the monarch cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shows a visage with such fury stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doralice dares no longer peace advise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor speak of treaty or of truce anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now parforce the battle must ensue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Tartar arms himself in haste; with pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wonted service of his squires he tarries:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This done, he springs upon the steed amain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile the champion’s who defended Paris;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-369" id="noteref-369" epub:type="noteref">369</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him with speed towards the listed plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fixt for that fierce assay, the courser carries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even then the king and barons thither made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that the strife was little time delayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Put on and laced the shining helmets were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And given to either champion was the spear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quickly the trumpet’s blast was heard in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose signal blanched a thousand cheeks with fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Levelled those cavaliers their lances bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spurring their warlike steeds to the career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in mid champaign, meet with such a shock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Earth appears to rive and Heaven to rock.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From this side and from that, the eagle flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Jove in air was wonted to sustain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So hurtled, but with plumes of different hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those others often on Thessalian plain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-370" id="noteref-370" epub:type="noteref">370</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beamy lances, rested by the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well warranted the warriors’ might and main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And worse than that encounter had withstood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So towers resist the wind, so rocks the flood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As Turpin truly writes, into the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upwent the splinters, broke in the career;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For two or three fell flaming from on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had ascended to the starry sphere.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-371" id="noteref-371" epub:type="noteref">371</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knights unsheathed their faulchions from the thigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, like those who were little moved by fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For new encounter wheeled, and, man to man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pointing at one another’s visor ran.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They, pointing at the visors’ sight, attacked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor with their faulchions at the steeds took aim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each other to unhorse, unseemly act!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since in that quarrel they are nought to blame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those err, nor know the usage, why by pact</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deem they were bound their horses not to maim:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without pact made, ’twas reckoned a misdeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And an eternal blot to smite a steed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They level at the visor, which is double,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet resists such mighty blows with pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The champions evermore their strokes redouble</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faster than pattering hail, which mars the grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bruises branch and leaf, and stalk and stubble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cheats the hopes of the expecting swain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To you is known the force of either brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And known the force of either warrior’s hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But yet no stroke well worthy of their might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those peers have dealt, so cautious are the twain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Tartar’s faulchion was the first to bite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which was good Rogero well nigh slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By one of those fell blows which either knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So well could plant, his shield was cleft in twain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath, his cuirass opened to the stroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the quick the cruel weapon broke.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The assistants’ hearts were frozen at the blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So did Rogero’s danger them appal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On whom the many’s favour, well they know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wishes rest, if not of one and all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then (had Fortune ordered matters so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the most part desired they should befall)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Taken had been the Tartar king or slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So had that blow offended all the train.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I think that blow was by some angel stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To save Rogero from the mischief near:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet at the king (nor answer he delayed)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He dealt a stroke more terrible than e’er.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Mandricardo’s head he aims his blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But such the fury of the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such his haste, he less my blame deserves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If slanting from the mark his faulchion swerves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Had Balisarda smote him full, though crowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Hector’s helm, the enchantment had been vain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-372" id="noteref-372" epub:type="noteref">372</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So reels the Tartar, by that stroke astound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from the bristle-hand lets go the rein:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thrice with his head he threats to smite the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While his unguided courser scowers the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Brigliadoro, whom by name you know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet, for his change of master, full of woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Never raged trampled serpent, never so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raged wounded lion, as in fell despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raged Mandricardo, rallying from that blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had deprived of sense the astonied knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as his pride and fury waxes, grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As much, yea more, his valour and his might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He at Rogero makes his courser vault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sword uplifted high for the assault.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Poised in his stirrups stood the Tartar lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And aiming at his foeman’s casque, believed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with the stroke of his descending sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero to the bosom should have cleaved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But from that youth, yet quicker in his ward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A wound beneath his arm the king received,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which made wide daylight in the stubborn mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That clothed the better armpit with its scale.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rogero drawing Balisarda back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out sprang the tepid blood of crimson stain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence Mandricardo’s arm did vigour lack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with less dint descended Durindane:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet on the croup the stripling tumbled back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Closing his eyelids, through excess of pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And memorable aye had been that blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had a worse helmet clothed the warrior’s brow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For this he pauses not, but spurs amain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Mandricardo smites in the right side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here little boots the texture of the chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the well wealded metal’s temper tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against that sword, which never falls in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which was enchanted to no end beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that against it nothing should avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enchanted corselet or enchanted mail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whate’er that sword takes-in it shears outright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the Tartar’s side inflicts a wound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He curses Heaven and raves in such despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less horribly the boisterous billows sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He now prepares to put forth all his might:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The shield, with argent bird and azure ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hurls, with rage transported, from his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grasps with right and left his trenchant brand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Marry,” (Rogero cried,) “it needs no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To prove your title to that ensign vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which now you cast away, and cleft before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can you more your right in it maintain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So saying, he parforce must prove how sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The danger and the dint of Durindane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which smites his front, and with such weight withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mountain lighter than that sword would fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If cleft his visor through the midst; ’twas well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That from the sight diverged the trenchant blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which on the saddle’s plated pommel fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet its double steel the faulchion stayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It reached his armour (like soft wax, the shell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oped, and the skirts wherewith ’twas overlaid)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And trenched upon his thigh a grievous wound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that ’twas long ere he again waxed sound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The spouting blood of either cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their arms had crimsoned in a double drain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence diversly the people guessed, which peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have the better of the warlike twain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But soon Rogero made the matter clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that keen sword, so many a champion’s bane:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this he at that part in fury past</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence Mandricardo had his buckler cast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He the left side of his good cuirass gored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And found a passage to the heart below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which a full palm above the flank he bored;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that parforce the Tartar must forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His every title to the famous sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The blazoned buckler, and its bird of snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yield, together with these seeds of strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Dearer than sword and shield⁠—his precious life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not unavenged the unhappy monarch dies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For in the very moment he is smit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sword⁠—for little period his⁠—he plies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And good Rogero’s visor would have split.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that he stopt the stroke in wary wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And broke its force and vigour ere it lit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its force and vigour broke: for he, below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The better arm, first smote his Tartar foe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Smit was the Child by Mandricardo’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the same moment he that monarch slew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, albeit thick, divides an iron band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And good steel cap beneath it; inches two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lies buried in the head the trenchant brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The solid bone and sinew severed through.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astound Rogero fell, on earth reversed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from his head a stream of life-blood burst.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rogero was the first who went to ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so much longer did the king delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nigh every one of those who waited round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weened he the prize and vaunt had borne away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, erred his Doralice, that oft was drowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In tears, and often clad in smiles that day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She thanked her God, with hands to Heaven extended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in such wise the fearful fight had ended.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when by tokens manifest appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The live man living and the dead man slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The favourers of those knights, with change of cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some weep and some rejoice, an altered train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King, lord, and every worthiest cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crowd round Rogero, who has risen with pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him to embrace and gratulate they wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And do him grace and honour without end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Each with Rogero is rejoiced, and feels</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That which he utters in his heart; among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The crowd the Sericane alone conceals</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Other than what he vouches with his tongue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He pleasure in his countenance reveals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With envy at the conquest inly stung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And⁠—were his destiny or chance to blame⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Curses whiche’er produced Rogero’s name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What of Rogero’s favour can be said?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What of caresses, many, true, and kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Agramant? that not without his aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have unrolled his ensigns the wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had to move from Afric been afraid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would have trusted in his host combined.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, now King Mandricardo is no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteems him the united world before.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor to Rogero lean the men alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him incline as well the female train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for the land of France had left their own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid the troops of Afric or of Spain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Doralice, herself, although she moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for her lover, cold and pale, complain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save by the griding curb of shame represt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her voice, perchance, had added to the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I say perchance, nor warrant it I dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit the thing may easily be true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such his manners, such his merits are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So beauteous is Rogero’s form to view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She (from experience we are well aware)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So prone to follow whatsoe’er is new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That not to play the widow’s lovelorn part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She on Rogero well might set her heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Though he did well alive, what could be done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Mandricardo, after he was dead?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis fitting she provide herself with one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That her, by night or day, may bravely stead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile to young Rogero’s succour run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king’s physician in his art best read;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, having seen the fruits of that fell strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already has ensured Rogero’s life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Agramant bids them diligently lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wounded warrior in his tent, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is evermore beside him, night and day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him with such love he watches, with such care:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his bed the Tartar’s arms and buckler gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So bade the Moorish king, suspended were;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suspended all, save trenchant Durindana,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Relinquished to the King of Sericana.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With Mandricardo’s arms, his other weed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was to Rogero given, and given with these</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was warlike Brigliador, whom on the mead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando left, distraught with his disease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Agramant Rogero gave the steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well knowing how that goodly gift would please.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more of this: parforce my strain returns</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her that vainly for Rogero burns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bradamant’s torment have I to recount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While for the courier damsel she did stay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With tidings of her love to Alban’s Mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her Hippalca measured back her way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She of Frontino first and Rodomont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next of good Rogero had to say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“How to the fount anew he had addrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His way, with Richardetto and the rest;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And how the Child, in rescue of the steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had gone with her to find the paynim rude;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And weened to have chastized his foul misdeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That from a woman took Frontino good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how the youth’s design did ill succeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because the king had other way pursued.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The reason too why to Mount Alban’s hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero had not come, at full she told;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And fully she to Bradamant exprest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What to excuse himself Rogero said:”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She after drew the letter from her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith entrusted she had thither sped:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With visage which more care than hope confest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paper Bradamant received and read;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, but that she expected to have seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero’s self, more welcome would have been.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To find herself with written scroll appaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In good Rogero’s place, whom she attends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marred her fair visage; which such fear portrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Despite and sorrow as her bosom rends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ten times the page she kisses, while the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As oft to him who writes her heart commends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tears alone which trickle from her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Keep it from kindling at her burning sighs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Four times, nay six, she that epistle read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And willed moreover that as many more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The message by that damsel should be said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who word and letter to Mount Alban bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while unceasing tears the lady shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, I believe, would ever have given o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save by the hope consoled, that she anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should briefly her beloved Rogero view.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rogero’s word was pledged for his return</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When fifteen days or twenty were gone by:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So had he after to Hippalca sworn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bidding her boldly on his faith rely.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“From accidents that chance at every turn”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Cried Bradamant) “what warranty have I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas!⁠—and such are commonest in war⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That none the knight’s return for ever bar?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alas! alas! Rogero, that above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Myself hast evermore been prized by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would have thought thou more than me could’st love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Any, and most thy mortal enemy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou helpest where to punish would above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And harm’st where thou should’st help; nor do I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thou as worthy praise or blame regard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such tardiness to punish and reward.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I know not if thou knowest⁠—the stones know⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How by Troyano was thy father slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet Troyano’s son, against his foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou would’st defend, and keep from harm or stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such vengeance upon him do’st thou bestow?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And do his vengers, as their meed obtain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I, descended of his stock, should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The martyr of the mortal cruelty?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To her Rogero, in his absence, said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady these sad words, and more beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lamenting aye; while her attendant maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor once alone, but often, certified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“The stripling would observe his faith, and prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her⁠—who could do no better⁠—to abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Child’s arrival till the time came round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he by promise to return was bound.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The comfort that Hippalca’s words convey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Hope, companion of the loving train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant’s fear and sorrow so allay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she enjoys some respite from her pain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This moves her in Mount Alban’s keep to stay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever thence that lady stirred again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until the day, that day the youthful knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had fixt, who ill observed his promise plight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But in that he his promise ill maintained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No blame upon Rogero should be cast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him one or other cause so long detained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The appointed time parforce he overpast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On a sick bed, long time, he, sorely pained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was laid, wherein a month or more he past</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In doubt of death; so deeply him had gored</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile in fight the Tartar monarch’s sword.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Him on the day prefixed the maid attended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor other tidings of the youth had read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But those he through Hippalca had commended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that which after Richardetto said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who told, “how him Rogero had defended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And freed the captive pair<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-373" id="noteref-373" epub:type="noteref">373</a> to prison led.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tidings, overjoyed, she hears repeat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet blended with some bitter is the sweet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For she had heard as well in that discourse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For might and beauty voiced, Marphisa’s praise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heard, how Rogero thither bends his course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together with that lady, as he says,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where in weak post and with unequal force</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Agramant the Christian army stays.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such fair companionship the lady lauds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But neither likes that union nor applauds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor light suspicion has she of that queen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, were Marphisa beauteous, as was said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they together till that time had been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’T were marvel but Rogero loved the maid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet would she not believe; but hung between</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her hopes and fears, and in Mount Alban stayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And close and anxious there, until the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which was to bring her joy or sorrow, lay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This while Mount Alban’s prince and castellain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, first of that fair brotherhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—I say in honour, not in age, for twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In right of birth before the warrior stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who⁠—as the sun illumes the starry train⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had by his deeds ennobled Aymon’s blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One day at noon, with none beside a page</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To serve him, reached that famous fortilage.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hither had good Rinaldo now repaired;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because returning Paris-ward again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Brava, (whither had he often fared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As said, to seek Angelica in vain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He of that pair those evil news had heard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His Malagigi and his Viviane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How they were to Maganza to be sent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence to Agrismont his way had bent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There, hearing of the safety of that pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of their enemies’ defeat and fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how Rogero and Marphisa were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The authors of their ruin; and how all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His valiant brethren and his cousins are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returned, and harboured in Mount Alban’s hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he there embrace the friendly throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each hour appears to him a twelvemonth long.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His course to Mont Albano had he ta’en;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, there embracing wife and children dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mother and brethren and the cousins twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(They who were captives to their foe whilere)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A parent swallow seems, amid that train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, with full beak, its fasting youth doth cheer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With them a day or more the warrior stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then issued forth and others thence conveyed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Guichard, Duke Aymon’s eldest born, and they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Richard, Alardo, and Richardet’ combined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vivian and Malagigi, wend their way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In arms, the martial paladin behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant, waiting the appointed day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which she, in her desire, too slow opined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feigned herself ailing to the brethren true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would she join in arms the banded crew;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, saying that she ailed, most truly said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet ’twas not corporal pain or fever sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It was Desire that on her spirit preyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Diseased with Love’s disastrous fit: no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo in Mount Alban’s castle stayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him his kinsman’s flower the warrior bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How he for Paris journeyed, and how well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He succoured Charles, shall other canto tell.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
