<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-35" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>The apostle praises authors to the peer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Duke Aymon’s martial daughter in affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conquers the giant monarch of Argier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the good Frontino makes a prey.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She next from Arles defies her cavalier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, while he marvels who would him assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grandonio and Ferrau she with her hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Serpentine unhorses on the strand.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Madonna, who will scale the high ascent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of heaven, to me my judgment to restore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, since from your bright eyes the weapon went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That pierced my heart, is wasting evermore?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet will not I such mighty loss lament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that it drain no faster than before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But⁠—ebbing further⁠—I should fear to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such as Orlando is described by me.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>To have anew that judgment, through the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I deem there is no need for me to fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the moon’s circle, or to Paradise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, I believe, mine is not lodged so high.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On your bright visage, on your beauteous eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alabastrine neck, and paps of ivory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wander my wits, and I with busy lip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I may have them back, these fain would sip.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Astolpho wandered through that palace wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Observing al the future lives around:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When those already woven he had spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the fatal wheel for finish wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He a fair fleece discerned that far outvied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fine gold, whose wondrous lustre jewels ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could these into a thread be drawn by art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would never equal by the thousandth part.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>The beauteous fleece he saw with wondrous glee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equalled by none amid that countless store;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when and whose such glorious life should be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Longed sore to know. “This,” (said the apostle hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Concealing nothing of its history,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Shall have existence twenty years before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dating from THE INCARNATE WORD, the year</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall marked my men with M and D appear;</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>“And, as for splendor and for substance fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This fleece shall have no like or equal, so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall the blest age wherein it shall appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be singular in this our world below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because all graces, excellent and rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Nature or which Study can bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or bounteous Fortune upon men can shower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall be its certain and eternal dower.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Between the king of rivers’ horns,” (he cries,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Stands what is now a small and humble town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before it runs the Po, behind it lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A misty pool of marsh; this⁠—looking down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stream of future years⁠—I recognize</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First of Italian cities of renown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only famed for wall and palace rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But noble ways of life and studies fair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Such exaltation, reached so suddenly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is not fortuitous nor wrought in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that is may his worthy cradle be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereof I speak, shall so the heaven ordain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For where men look for fruit they graff the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And study still the rising plant to train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And artist uses to refine the gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Designed by him the precious gem to hold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Nor ever, in terrestrial realm, so fine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fair a raiment spirit did invest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rarely soul so great from realms divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has been, or will be, thitherward addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that whereof THE ETERNAL had design</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fashion good Hippolytus of Este:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hippolytus of Este shall he be hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On whom so rich a gift of God shall light.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>“All those fair graces, that, on many spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have served many wholly to array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are all united for his ornament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of whom thou hast entreated me to say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To prop the arts, the virtues is he sent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And should I seek his merits to display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So long a time would last my tedious strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando might expect his wits in vain.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>’Twas so Christ’s servant with the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discoursed; they having satisfied their view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sight of that fair mansion, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That whence conveyed were human lives, the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Issued upon the stream, whose waves appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turbid with sand and of discoloured hue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And found that ancient man upon the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who names, engraved on metal, thither bore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>I know not if you recollect; of him</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I speak, whose story I erewhile suspended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ancient of visage, and so swift of limb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That faster far than forest stag he wended.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With names he filled his mantle to the brim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye thinned the pile, but ne’er his labour ended;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in that stream, hight Lethe, next bestowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yea, rather cast away, his costly load.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>I say, that when upon the river side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrives that ancient, of his store profuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He all those names into the turbid tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discharges, as he shakes his mantle loose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A countless shoal, they in the stream subside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor henceforth are they fit for any use;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, out of mighty myriads, hardly one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is saved of those which waves and sand o’errun.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Along that river and around it fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vile crows and ravening vultures, and a crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of choughs, and more, that with discordant cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deafening din their airy flight pursue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the prey all hurry, when from high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those ample riches they so scattered view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with their beak or talon seize the prey:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet little distance they their prize convey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>When they would raise themselves in upward flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They have not strength the burden to sustain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that parforce in Lethe’s water light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The worthy names, which lasting praise should gain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two swans there are amid those birds, as white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My lord, as is your banner’s snowy grain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who catch what names they can, and evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With these return securely to the shore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>Thus, counter to that ancient’s will malign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who them to the devouring river dooms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some names are rescued by the birds benign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wasteful Oblivion all the rest consumes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now swim about the stream those swans divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now beat the buxom air with nimble plumes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till, near that impious river’s bank, they gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hill, and on that hill a hallowed fane.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>To Immortality ’tis sacred; there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lovely nymph, that from the hill descends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the Lethean river makes repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Takes from those swans their burden, and suspends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The names about an image, raised in air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon a shaft, which in mid fane ascends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There consecrates and fixes them so fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That all throughout eternity shall last.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Of that old sire, and why he would dispense</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Idly, all those fair names, as ’twould appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the birds and holy place, from whence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The nymph was to the river seen to steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The solemn mystery, and the secret sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho, marvelling, desired to hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prayed the man of God would these unfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to the warrior thus their meaning told.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“There moves no leaf beneath, thou hast to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But here above some sign thereof we trace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since all, in Heaven above or Earth below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must correspond, though with a different face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ancient, with his sweeping beard of snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By nought impeded and so swift of pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Works the same end and purpose in our clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As are on earth below performed by Time.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“The life of man its final close attains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When on the wheel is wound the fatal twine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There fame, and here above the mark remains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For both would be immortal and divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for that bearded sire’s unwearied pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his below, that for their wreck combine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One drowns them, as thou seest, mid sand and surges.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one in long forgetfulness immerges.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>“And even, as here above, the raven, daw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vulture, and divers other birds of air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All from the turbid water seek to draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The names, which in their sight appear most fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even thus below, pimps, flatterers, men of straw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Buffoons, informers, minions, all who there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flourish in courts, and in far better guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And better odour, than the good and wise;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“And by the crowd are gentle courtiers hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because they imitate the ass and swine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the just Parcae or (to speak aright)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Venus and Bacchus cut their master’s twine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—These base and sluggish dullards, whom I cite⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Born but to blow themselves with bread and wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In their vile mouths awhile such names convey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then drop the load, which is Oblivion’s prey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“But as the joyful swans, that, singing sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Convey the medals safely to the fane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So they whose praises poets well repeat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are rescued from oblivion, direr pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than death. O Princes, wary and discreet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That wisely tread in Caesar’s steps, and gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Authors for friends! They, doubt it not, shall save</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your noble names from Lethe’s laxy wave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Rare as those gentle swans are poets too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That well the poet’s name have merited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well because it is Heaven’s will, that few</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Great rulers should the paths of glory tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As through foul fault of sordid lordlings, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let sacred Genius beg his daily bread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who putting down the Virtues, raise the tribe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Vices, and the liberal arts proscribe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Believe it, that these ignorant men should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blind and deprived of judgment, is God’s doom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who makes them loathe the light of poetry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That envious Death may wholly them consume.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besides that Song can quicken and set free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him that is prisoned in the darkness tomb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though foul his name, if Cirrha him befriend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its savour myrrh and spikenard shall transcend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Aeneas not so pious, nor of arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So strong Achilles, Hector not so bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was, as ’tis famed; and mid the nameless swarm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thousands and thousands higher rank might hold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But gift of palace and of plenteous farm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bestowed by heirs of them, whose deeds they told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have moved the poet with his honoured hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To place them upon Glory’s highest stand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Augustus not so holy and benign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was as great Virgil’s trumpet sounds his name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he savoured the harmonious line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His foul proscription passes without blame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Nero was unjust would none divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor haply would he suffer in his fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though Heaven and Earth were hostile, had he known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The means to make the tuneful tribe his own.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Homer a conqueror Agamemnon shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And makes the Trojan seem of coward vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the suitors, faithful to her vows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Penelope a thousand wrongs sustain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet⁠—would’st thou I the secret should expose?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By contraries throughout the tale explain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That from the Trojan bands the Grecian ran;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deem Penelope a courtezan.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“What fame Eliza, she so chaste of sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the other hand, has left behind her, hear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who widely is a wanton baggage hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Solely that she to Maro was not dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marvel not this should cause me sore despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if my speech diffusive should appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Authors I love, and pay the debt I owe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Speaking their praise; an author I below!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“There earned I, above all men, what no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Time nor yet Death from me shall take away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And it behoved our Lord, of whom I bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such testimony, so my paints to pay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It grieves me much for them, on whom her door</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Courtesy closes on a stormy day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who meagre, pale, and worn with hopeless suit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knock night and day, and ever without fruit.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Henceforth with that apostle let the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remain; for I have now to make a spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As far as ’tis from heaven to earth; for here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I cannot hang for ever on the wing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I to the dame return, who was whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wounded by jealousy with cruel sting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I left her where, successively o’erthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Three kings she quickly upon earth had strown;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>And afterwards arriving in a town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At eve, which on the road to Paris lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heard tidings of Rinaldo’s victory blown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how in Arles the vanquished paynim lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Sure, her Rogero with the king is gone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as reappears the dawning day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards fair Provence, whither (as she hears)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Charlemagne pursues, her way she steers.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She towards Provence, by the nearest road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So journeying, met a maid of mournful air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, though her cheeks with tears were overflowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was yet of visage and of manners fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She was it, so transfixed with Love’s keen goad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who sighed for Monodante’s valiant heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who at the bridge had left her lord a thrall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When with King Rodomont he tried a fall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>She sought one of an otter’s nimbleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By water and by land, a cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So fierce, that she that champion⁠—to redress</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her wrongs⁠—might match against the paynim peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When good Rogero’s lady, comfortless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To that fair dame, as comfortless, drew near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her she saluted courteously, and next</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Demanded by what sorrow she was vext.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Flordelice marked the maid, that, in her sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared a warrior fitted for her needs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the bridge and river ‘gan recite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Argier’s mighty king the road impedes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how he had gone nigh to slay her knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that more doughty were the monarch’s deeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that the wily paynim vantage-ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that streight bridge and foaming river found.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Are you (she said) so daring and so kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As kind and daring you appear in show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Venge me of him that has my lord confined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And makes me wander thus, opprest with woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For love of Heaven; or teach me where to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least a knight who can resist the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of such skill that little boot shall bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His bridge and river to the pagan king.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Besides that so you shall achieve an end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Befitting courteous man and cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You will employ your valour to befriend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The faithfullest of lovers far and near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His other virtues I should ill commend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many and so many, that whoe’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knoweth not these, may well be said to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One without ears to hear or eyes to see.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The high-minded maid, to whom aye welcome are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All noble quests, by which she worthily</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May hope a great and glorious name to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Straight to the paynim’s bridge resolves to hie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now so much the more⁠—as in despair⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wends willingly, although it were to die:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that she, ever with herself at strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming Rogero lost, detested life.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“O loving damsel (she made answer), I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Offer mine aid, for such as ’tis, to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hard and dread adventure, passing by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Causes beside that move me, most that you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A matter of your lover testify,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which I, in sooth, hear warranted of few;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he is constant; for i’faith I swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I well believed all lovers perjured were.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>With these last words a sigh that damsel drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A sigh which issued from her heart; then said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Go we”; and, with the following sun, those two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the deep stream arrived and bridge of dread:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Seen of the guard, that on his bugle blew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A warning blast, when strangers thither sped⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pagan arms him, girds his goodly brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And takes upon the bridge his wonted stand;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>And as the maid appears in martial scale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The moody monarch threatens her to slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless her goodly courser and her mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As an oblation to the tomb she pay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair Bradamant who knew the piteous tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How murdered by him Isabella lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The story gentle Flordelice had taught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Replied in answer to that paynim haught.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Wherefore, O brutish man, for your misdeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should penance by the innocent be done?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis fitting to appease her you should bleed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You killed her, and to all the deed is known.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that, of trophied armour or of weed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those so many, by your lance o’erthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your armour should the blest oblation be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And you the choicest victim, slain by me;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And dearer shall the gift be from my hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since I a woman am, as she whilere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor save to venge her have I sought this strand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this desire alone I hither steer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first, ’tis good some pact we understand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before we prove our prowess with the spear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You shall do by me, if o’erthrown, what you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By other prisoners have been wont to do.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“But if, as I believe and trust, you fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will your horse and armour have (she cried),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And taking down all others from the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hang on the tomb alone those arms of pride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And will that you release each warlike thrall.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“The pact is just (King Rodomont replied),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But those, my prisoners, are not here confined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And therefore cannot be to you consigned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>“These have I sent into mine Africk reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But this I promise thee, and pledge my fay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If, by strange fortune, thou thy seat maintain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I shall be dismounted in the fray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Delivered, all, shall be the captive train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within what time suffices to convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An order thither, that they our of hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Should do what thou, if conqueror, may’st command.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“But art thou undermost, as fitter were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as thou surely wilt be, I from thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not therefore will thy forfeit armour tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor shall thy name inscribed, as vanquished, be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To thy bright face, bright eyes, and beauteous hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All breathing love and grace, the victory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will I resign; let it suffice that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then stoop to love me, as thou hatest now.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“To fall by me thou needest not disdain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I with such strength, such nerve am fortified.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Somedeal she smiled; but smiled in bitter vein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Savouring of anger more than aught beside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She spake not to that haughty man again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the bridge-end returned the damsel, plied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her courser with the rowels, couched her spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rode to meet the furious cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>King Rodomont prepares his course to run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Comes on at speed; and with such mighty sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Echoes that bridge, the thundering noise might stun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ears of many distant from the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The golden lance its wonted work has done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that fierce Moor, in tourney so renowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This from the saddle lifts, in air suspends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then headlong on the narrow bridge extends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Scarce for her horse the martial damsel can</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Find space to pass, when she has thrown her foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And little lacked, and mighty risque she ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of falling into that deep stream below:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, born of wind and flame, good Rabican</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So dextrous was, and could so lightly go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He picked a path along the outer ledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And could have paced upon a faulchion’s edge.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>The damsel wheeled, towards the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returned, and him bespoke in sportive way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Who is the loser now to thee is clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who is undermost in this assay.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Silent remained the monarch of Argier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amazed, that woman him on earth should lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He cannot, or he will not speak; and lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On earth, like one astound, in idiot guise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>Silent and sad, he raised himself from ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when he some few paces thence had gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His shield unbraced and helm and mail unbound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He flung against the tomb; and thence, alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afoot the moody monarch left that ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet not till he had given command to one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Of his four squires was he) to do his hest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Relating to those captives, as exprest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>He parts; and save that in a caverned cell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He dwelt, no further news of him were known:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile the harness of that infidel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant hung upon the lofty stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having thence removed all plate and shell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith (as by the writing it was shown)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavaliers of Charles their limbs had drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She moved not, nor let other move, the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Besides the arms of Monodantes’ heir</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were those of Sansonet and Olivier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, bound in search of good Orlando, were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither conducted by the road most near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The day before here taken was the pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sent by that proud paynim to Argier:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These warriors’ arms the martial maid bade lower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From that fair tomb, and stored them in the tower.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>All others, taken from the paynim train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant left suspended from the stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid these a king’s, that idly and in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had thither, seeking Frontalatte, gone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say his arms, that ruled Circassia’s reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, after wandering long, by date and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here to his grief another courser left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lightly went his way, of arms bereft.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>Stript of his armour and afoot, did part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That paynim monarch from the bridge of dread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Rodomont permitted to depart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those other knights that in his faith were bred:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to his camp to wend he had no heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For there he was ashamed to show his head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since, in such fashion, thither to return</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After his boasts, had been too foul a scorn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet still with new desire the warrior burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek her, fixed alone in his heart’s core;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such the monarch’s chance, he quickly learned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(I cannot tell you who the tidings bore)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She was towards her native land returned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence, as Love spurs and goads him evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bowns him straight her footsteps to pursue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I to Bradamant return anew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>When she in other writing had displaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How she had freed that passage from the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To mournful Flordelice the martial maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She that still held her weeping visage low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turned her, and courteously that lady prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To tell her whither she designed to go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her afflicted Flordelice replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“To Arles, where camp the paynims, would I ride.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Which bark (I hope) and fitting company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To carry me to Africk may afford;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor will I halt upon my way, till I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Once more rejoin my husband and my lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All means and measures there resolved to try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That may release him from his jailer’s ward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And should the Saracen deceitful prove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Others, and others yet, I mean to move.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“My company (replied the martial fair)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For some part of the road, I offer thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till we have sight of Arles; then to repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, will pray you, for the love of me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To find King Agramant’s Rogero there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose glorious name is spread o’er land and sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And render to that knight this goodly horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence the proud Moor was flung in martial course.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Say thus, from point to point, ‘A cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That would in combat prove his chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the world at large would fain make clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy breach of faith with him, that thou may’st be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ready and well prepared for the career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gave me this horse, that I might give it thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bids thee promptly mail and corslet dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wait him, who with thee will wage the fight.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Say this and nought beside, and would he hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My name, declare that ’tis to thee unknown.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With wonted kindness cried that dame, “I ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In spending life itself, not words alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should weary in your service; since whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You would in my behalf as much have done.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her Aymon’s daughter thanked in courteous strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to her hand consigned Frontino’s rein.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Through long days’ journey, by that river-shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together go the lovely pilgrim pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till they see Arles, and hear the hollow roar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of billows breaking on the sea-beach bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Almost without the suburbs, and before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The furthest barrier, stops the martial fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To furnish Flordelice what time might need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the conveyance of Rogero’s steed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She forward rode, within the enclosure sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And o’er the bridge and through the gateway wended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (furnished with a guide, who thither led)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To young Rogero’s inn; and there descended.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She to the Child, as bid, her message said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gave the courser, to her care commended:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then (for she waits not for an answer) speeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In haste to execute her proper needs.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero stands confused; he finds no end</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his perplexing thoughts, and cannot see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who should defy him, who that message send,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To speak him ill, and do him courtesy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thus as faithless him should reprehend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or any reprehend, whoe’er it be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor knows he nor imagines; least of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On Bradamant the knight’s suspicions fall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>To think ’twas Rodomont the youthful peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was more inclined than any other wight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wherefore even from him he this should hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Muses, nor can the cause divine aright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save him, in all the world the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knows not of one, that has him at despite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile Dordona’s lady craved the field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And loud that martial damsel’s bugle pealed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>To Agramant and King Marsilius flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The news, that one craved battle on the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Serpentine stood by chance before the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gained their leave to don his plate and chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vowed to take that haughty man; the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of people over wall and rampart strain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor child nor elder was there, but he pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see which champion should bestir him best.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>In beauteous arms and costly surcoat drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Serpentine of the star to combat sped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ground he at the first encounter prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if equipt with wings, his courser fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel flew his charger to arrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the bride to that paynim led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaiming: “Mount, and bid your monarch send</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A knight that better can with me contend.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The Moorish king, that on the rampart’s height</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood, with a mighty following, next the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marking the joust, much marvelled at the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the foe’s courtesy to him of Spain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“He takes him not, although he may of right,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He cries i’ the hearing of the paynim train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Serpentine comes, and, as the maid commands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A better warrior of that king demands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Grandonio de Volterna, fierce of mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in all Spain the proudest cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The second for that fell encounter stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such favour had his suit obtained whilere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“To thee thy courtesy shall do no good,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He threats, “for if unhorsed in the career</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A prisoner to my lord shalt thou be led:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, if I fight as wonted, thou art dead.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>She cries, “I would not thy discourtesy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should make me so forget my courteous vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that aforehand I should caution thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Back to thy fortress to return again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere on hard earth thy bones shall battered be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Go tell thy king no champion of thy grain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I seek, but hither come to crave the fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With warrior that is worthy of my might.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Bradamant’s sharp and stinging answer stirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim’s fury to a mighty flame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that, without the power to speak a word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He wheeled his courser, filled with rage and shame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wheeling as well, at that proud paynim spurred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her horse with levelled lance the warlike dame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the charmed weapon smites Grandonio’s shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With heels in air, he tumbles on the field.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>To him the high-minded damsel gave his horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said, “Yet was this fate to thee foreshown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Instead of craving thus the knightly course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better mine embassy wouldst thou have done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some other knight, that equals me in force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I pray thee bid the Moorish king send down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor weary me, by forcing me to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Champions like thee, untried in martial feat.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>They on the walls, that know not who the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in the joust so well maintains his seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Name many a warrior, famous in career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That often make them shake in fiercest heat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brandimart many deem the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More guesses in renowned Rinaldo meet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many would deem Orlando was the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that they knew his pitiable plight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The third encounter craved Lanfusa’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cried, “Not that I better hope to fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that to warriors who this course have run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My fall may furnish an excuse more fair.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next, with all arms that martial jousters don,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clothed him, and of a hundred steeds that were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ready for service, kept in lordly stall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For speed and action chose the best of all.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>He bowned him for the tournay, on his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first saluted her and she the knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“If ’tis allowed to ask,” (the lady cried,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Tell me in courtesy how ye are hight.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this Ferrau the damsel satisfied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who rarely hid himself form living wight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Ye will I not refuse,” (subjoined the dame)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Albeit I to meet another came.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>—“And who?” the Spaniard said;⁠—the maid replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Rogero”; and pronounced the word with pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in so saying, her fair face was dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All over with the rose’s crimson grain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She after added, “Hither have I hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To prove how justly famed his might and main.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No other care have I, no other call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with that gentle youth to try a fall.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>She spoke the word in all simplicity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which some already may in malice wrest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ferrau replied, “Assured I first must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which of us two is schooled in warfare best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If what has chanced to many, falls on me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hither, when I return, shall be addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To mend my fault, that gentle cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With whom you so desire to break a spear.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Discoursing all this while, the martial maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spake with her beavor up, without disguise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ferrau, as that fair visage he surveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perceived he was half vanquished by its eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to himself, in under tone, he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“He seems an angel sent from Paradise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, though he should not harm me with his lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am already quelled by that sweet glance.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>They take their ground, and to the encounter ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, like those others, Ferrau goes to ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His courser Bradamant retained, and cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Return, and keep thy word with me as bound.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shamed, he returned, and by his monarch’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among his peers, the young Rogero found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let the stripling know the stranger knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without the walls, defied him to the fight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero (for not yet that warrior knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What champion him in duel would assail)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nigh sure of victory, with transport glows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bids his followers bring his plate and mail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor having seen beneath those heavy blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest dismounted, makes his spirit quail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But how he armed, how sallied, what befell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That knight, in other canto will I tell.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
