<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>The old Atlantes suffers fatal wreck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foiled by the ring, and young Rogero freed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who soars in air till he appears a speck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mounted upon the wizard’s winged steed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Obediant to the royal Charles’s beck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He who had followed Love’s imperious lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rinaldo, disembarks on British land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saves Genevra, doomed to stake and brand.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Though an ill mind appear in simulation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for the most, such quality offends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis plain that this in many a situation</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is found to further beneficial ends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And save from blame, and danger, and vexation;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since we converse not always with our friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this, less clear than clouded, mortal life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beset with snares, and full of envious strife.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>If after painful proof we scarcely find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A real friend, through various chances sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom we may communicate our mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Keeping no watch upon our wandering thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What should the young Rogero’s lady kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do with Brunello, not sincere, but fraught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With treasons manifold, and false and tainted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As by the good enchantress truly painted?</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>She feigns as well with that deceitful scout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Fitting with him the father of all lies)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Watches his thievish hands in fear and doubt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And follows every motion with her eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When lo! a mighty noise is heard without!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“O mighty mother! king of heaven!” she cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“What thing is this I hear?” and quickly springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the place from whence the larum rings,</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>And sees the host and all his family,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, one to door, and one to window slips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With eyes upturned and gazing at the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if to witness comet or eclipse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there the lady views, with wondering eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What she had scarce believed from other’s lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A feathered courser, sailing through the rack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who bore an armed knight upon his back.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>Broad were his pinions, and of various hue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seated between, a knight the saddle pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clad in steel arms, which wide their radiance threw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His wonderous course directed to the west:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There dropt among the mountains lost to view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this was, as that host informed his guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(And true the tale) a sorcerer, who made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now farther, now more near, his frequent raid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>“He, sometimes towering, soars into the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then seems, descending, but to skim the ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of all beauteous women makes a prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, to their mischief, in these parts are found.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence, whether in their own or other’s eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteemed as fair, the wretched damsels round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(And all in fact the felon plunders) hine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As fearing of the sun to be descried.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>“A castle on the Pyrenean height</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The necromancer keeps, the work of spell.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(The host relates) “of steel, so fair and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All nature cannot match the wonderous shell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There many cavaliers, to prove their might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have gone, but none returned the tale to tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that I doubt, fair sir, the thief enthralls</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or slays whoever in the encounter falls.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The watchful maid attends to every thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Glad at her heart, and trusting to complete</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(What she shall compass by the virtuous ring)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The downfall of the enchanter and his seat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to the host⁠—“A guide I pray thee bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who better knows than me the thief’s retreat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So burns my heart. (nor can I choose but go)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To strive in battle with this wizard foe.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>“It shall not need,” exclaimed the dwarfish Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“For I, myself, will serve you as a guide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who have the road set down, with other lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that you shall rejoice with me to ride.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He meant the ring, but further hint forbore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest dearly he the avowed should abide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she to him⁠—“Your guidance gives me pleasure.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meaning by this she hoped to win his treasure.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>What useful was to say, she said, and what</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might hurt her with the Saracen, concealed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well suited to her ends, the host had got</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A palfrey, fitting for the road or field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She bought the steed, and as Aurora shot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her rosy rays, rode forth with spear and shield:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And maid and courier through a valley wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brunello now before and now behind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>From wood to wood, from mount to mountain hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They clomb a summit, which in cloudless sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discovers France and Spain, and either shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As from a peak of Apennine the eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May Tuscan and Sclavonian sea explore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There, whence we journey to Camaldoli.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then through a rugged path and painful wended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which thence into a lowly vale descended.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>A rock from that deep valley’s centre springs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bright walls of steel about its summit go:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this as high that airy summit flings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As it leaves all the neighbouring cliffs below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He may not scale the height who has not wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vainly would each painful toil bestow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Lo! where his prisoners!” Sir Brunello cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Ladies and cavaliers, the enchanter sties.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Scarped smooth upon four parts, the mountain bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seemed fashioned with the plumb, by builder’s skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor upon any side was path or stair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which furnished man the means to climb the hill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The castle seemed the very nest and lair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of animal, supplied with plume and quill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here the damsel knows ’tis time to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wily dwarf, and take the ring away.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>But deems it foul, with blood of man to stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unarmed and of so base a sort, her brand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For well, without his death, she may obtain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The costly ring; and so suspends her hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brunello, off his guard, with little pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She seized, and strongly bound with girding band:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to a lofty fir made fast the string;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But from his finger first withdrew the ring.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>Neither by tears, nor groans, nor sound of woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To move the stedfast maid the dwarf had power:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She down the rugged hill descended slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until she reached the plain beneath the tower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then gave her bugle breath, the keep below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To call the castled wizard to the stower:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when the sound was finished, threatening cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And called him to the combat and defied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Not long within his gate the enchanter stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After he heard the voice and bugle ring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the foe, who seemed a man, arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In arms, with him the horse is on the wing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But his appearance well consoled the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, with small cause for fear, beheld him bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor mace, nor rested lance, nor bitting sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith the corselet might be bruised or gored.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>On his left arm alone his shield he took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Covered all o’er with silk of crimson hue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his right-hand he held an open book,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence, as the enchanter read, strange wonder grew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For often times, to sight, the lance he shook;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And flinching eyelids could not hide the view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With tuck or mace he seemed to smite the foe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But sate aloof and had not struck a blow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>No empty fiction wrought by magic lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But natural was the steed the wizard pressed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him a filly to griffin bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hight hippogryph. In wings and beak and crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Formed like his sire, as in the feet before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But like the mare, his dam, in all the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such on Riphaean hills, though rarely found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are bred, beyond the frozen ocean’s bound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Drawn by enchantment from his distant lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wizard thought but how to tame the foal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in a month, instructed him to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saddle and bit, and gallop to the goal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And execute on earth or in mid air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All shifts of manege, course and caracole;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with such labour wrought. This only real,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where all the rest was hollow and ideal.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>This truth by him with fictions was combined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose sleight passed red for yellow, black for white:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all his vain enchantments could not blind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The maid, whose virtuous ring assured her sight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet she her blows discharges at the wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And spurring here and there prolongs the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So drove or wheeled her steed, and smote at nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And practised all she had before been taught.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>When she sometime had fought upon her horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She from the courser on her feet descends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To compass and more freely put in force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As by the enchantress schooled, her wily ends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wizard, to display his last resource,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unweeting the defence, towards her wends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bares the shield, secure to blind his foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the magic light, astonished, throw.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>The shield might have been shown at first, nor he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Needed to keep the cavaliers at bay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that he loved some master-stroke to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Achieved by lance or sword in single fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As with the captive mouse, in sportive glee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wily cat is sometimes seen to play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till waxing wroth, or weary of her prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She bites, and at a snap the prisoner dies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>To cat and mouse, in battles fought before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I liken the magician and his foes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the comparison holds good no more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, with the ring, the maid against him goes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Firm and attentive still, and watching sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest upon her the wizard should impose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as she sees him bare the wondrous shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Closes her eyes and falls upon the field.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Not that the shining metal could offend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As wont those others, from its cover freed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But so the damsel did, to make descend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vain enchanter from his wondrous steed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor was in ought defeated of her end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For she no sooner on the grassy mead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had laid her head, than wheeling widely round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flying courser pitched upon the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Already cased again, the shield was hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the magician, at his sadle bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He lights and seeks her, who like wolf among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bushes, couched in thicket, waits the roe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She without more delay from ambush sprung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he drew near, and grappled fast the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That wretched man, the volume by whose aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He all his battles fought, on earth had laid:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And ran to bind her with a chain, which he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Girt round about him for such a purpose, wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he deemed she was no less to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mastered and bound than those subdued before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him hath the dame already flung; by me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Excused with reason, if he strove not more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For fearful were the odds between that bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And puissant maid, and warrior weak and old!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Intending to behead the fallen foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She lifts her conquering hand; but in mid space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When she beholds his visage, stops the blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if disdaining a revenge so base.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She sees in him, her prowess has laid low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A venerable sire, with sorrowing face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose hair and wrinkles speak him, to her guess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of years six score and ten, or little less.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Kill me, for love of God!” (afflicted sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The old enchanter full of wrath did cry).</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the victorious damsel was not more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Averse to kill, than he was bent to die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To know who was the necromancer hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gentle lady had desire, and why</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tower he in that savage place designed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doing such outrage foul to all mankind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Nor I, by malice moved, alas! poor wight,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(The weeping necromancer answer made,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Built the fair castle on the rocky height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet for rapine ply the robber’s trade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But only to redeem a gentle knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From danger sore and death, by love was swayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, as the skies foreshow, in little season,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is doomed to die a Christian, and by treason.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“The sun beholds not ’twixt the poles, a Child</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So excellent as him, and passing fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who from his infancy, Rogero styled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Atlantes I) was tutored by my care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By love of fame and evil stars beguiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He follows into France Troyano’s heir.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, in my eyes, than son esteemed more dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I seek to snatch from France and peril near.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“I only built the beauteous keep to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero’s dungeon, safely harboured there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who whilom was subdued in fight by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As I to-day had hoped thyself to snare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dames and knights, and more of high degree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have to this tower conveyed, his lot to share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That with such partners of his prison pent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He might the loss of freedom less lament.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Save they should seek to break their dungeon’s bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I grant my inmates every other pleasure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For whatsoever in the world is found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Search its four quarters, in this keep I treasure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Whatever heart can wish or tongue can sound)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cates, brave attire, game, sport, or mirthful measure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My field well sown, I well had reaped my grain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that thy coming makes my labour vain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Ah! then unless thy heart less beauteous be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than thy sweet face, mar not my pious care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Take my steel buckler, this I give to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And take that horse, which flies so fast in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor meddle with my castle more; or free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One or two captive friends, the rest forbear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or (for I crave but this) release them all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that Rogero but remain my thrall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Or if disposed to take him from my sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the youth be into France conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be pleased to free my miserable sprite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From its now rotted bark, long decayed.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Prate as thou wilt, I shall restore the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To liberty,” replied the martial maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Nor offer shield and courser to resign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which are not in thy gift⁠—already mine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Nor were they thine to take or to bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would it appear that such exchange were wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou sayest to save him from what stars foreshow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cheat an evil influence of the skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero is confined. Thou canst not know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or knowing, canst not change his destinies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, if unknown an ill so near to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far less mayest thou another’s fate foresee.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Seek not thy death from me; for the petition</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is made in vain; but if for death thou sigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though the whole world refused the requisition,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A soul resolved would find the means to die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But ope thy gates to give thy guests dismission</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before thine hand the knot of life untie.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So spake the scornful dame with angry mock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Speeding her captive still towards the rock.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Round by the conqueror with the chain he bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Atlantes walked, the damsel following nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who trusted not to the magician hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although he seemed subdued in port and eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor many paces went the pair, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They at the mountain’s foot the cleft espy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With steps by which the rugged hill to round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And climb, till to the castle-gate they wound:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Atlantes from the threshold, graved by skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With characters and wondrous signs, upturned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A virtuous stone, where, underneath the sill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pots, with perpetual fire and secret, burned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The enchanter breaks them; and at once the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To an inhospitable rock is turned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor wall nor tower on any side is seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if no castle there had ever been.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Then from the lady’s toils the wizard clears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His limbs, as thrush escapes the fowler’s snare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him as well his castle disappears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leaves the prisoned troop in open air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From their gay lodgings, dames and cavaliers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unhoused upon that desert, bleak and bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many at the freedom felt annoy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which dispossessed them of such life of joy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>There is Gradasso, there is Sacripant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is Prasildo, noble cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with Rinaldo came from the Levant;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Iroldo, too, Prasildo’s friend sincere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there, at last, the lovely Bradamant</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discerns Rogero, long desired and dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, when assured it was that lady, flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With joyful cheer to greet the damsel true;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>As her he prized before his eyes, his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His life; from that day cherished when she stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uncasqued for him, and from the fight apart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence an arrow drank her virgin blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twere long to tell who launched the cruel dart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how the lovers wandered in the wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now guided by the sun, and now benighted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here first since that encounter reunited.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>Now that the stripling sees her here, and knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone she freed him from the wizard’s nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He deems, his bosom with such joy overflows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he is singly fortunate and blest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, where late the damsel conquered, goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The band, descending from the mountain’s crest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And finds the hippogryph, who bore the shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But in its case of crimson silk concealed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>To take him by the rein the lady there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approached, and he stood fast till she was nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then spread his pinions to the liquid air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at short distance lit, half-mountain high:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as she follows him with fruitless care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not longer flight nor shorter will he try.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis thus the raven, on some sandy beach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lures on the dog, and flits beyond his reach.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Gradasso, Sacripant, Rogero, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all those other knights below were met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where’er, they hope he may return, pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beast, and up and down, each pass beset.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He having led those others, as he flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Often to rocky height, and bottom wet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among the rocks of the moist valley dropt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at short distance from Rogero stopt.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>This was Atlantes the enchanter’s deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose pious wishes still directed were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see Rogero from his peril freed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This was his only thought, his only care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for such end dispatched the winged steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him out of Europe by this sleight to bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero took his bridle, but in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he was restive to the guiding rein.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Now the bold youth from his Frontino flings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Frontino was his gentle courser hight)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then leaps on him who towers in air, and stings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And goads his haughty heart with rowels bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He runs a short career; then upward springs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And through mid ether soars a fairer flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than hawk, from which the falconer plucks away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In time the blinding hood, and points her prey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>When her Rogero the fair dame discerned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fearful peril, soar so high a strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She stood long space amazed, ere she returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her right judgement, and sound wits again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what she erst of Ganymede had learned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Snatched up to heaven from his paternal reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feared might befall the stripling, born through air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As gentle as young Ganymede and fair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She on Rogero looks with stedfast eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As long as feeble sight can serve her use;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in her mind next tracks him through the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When sight in vain the cherished youth pursues.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still renewing tears, and groans, and sighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will not afford her sorrow peace or truce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After the knight had vanished from her view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her eyes she on the good Frontino threw.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And lest the courser should become the prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the first traveller, who passed the glen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him will not leave; but thence to bear away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolves, in trust to see his lord again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The griffin soars, nor can Rogero stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flying courser; while, beneath his ken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each peak and promontory sinks in guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he discerns not flat from mountain-rise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>After the hippogryph has won such height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he is lessened to a point, he bends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His course for where the sun, with sinking light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he goes round the heavenly crab, descends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shoots through air, like well-greased bark and light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which through the sea a wind propitious sends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him leave we on his way, who well shall speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And turn we to Rinaldo in his need.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>Day after day the good Rinaldo fares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forced by the wind, the spacious ocean through;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now westward borne, and now toward the Bears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For night and day the ceaseless tempest blew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scotland at last her dusky coast uprears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gives the Caledonian wood to view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, through its shadowy groves of ancient oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oft echoes to the champion’s sturdy stroke.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>Through this roves many a famous cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Renowned for feat in arms, of British strain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And throng from distant land, or country near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">French, Norse, of German knights, a numerous train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let none, save he be valiant, venture here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, seeking glory, death may be his gain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here Arthur, Galahalt, and Gauvaine fought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well Sir Launcelot and Tristram wrought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And other worthies of the table round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Of either table, whether old or new)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose trophies yet remain upon the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proof of their valiant feats, Rinaldo true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith his armour and Bayardo found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And landed on the woody coast: The crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bade, with all the haste they might, repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Berwick’s neighbouring port, and wait him there.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Without a guide or company he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through that wide forest; choosing now this way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now that, now other, as it might present</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hope of adventurous quest or hard assay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, ere the first day’s circling sun is spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The peer is guested in an abbey gray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which spends much wealth in harbouring those who claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its shelter, warlike knight or wandering dame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>The monks and abbot to Mount Alban’s peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A goodly welcome in their house accord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who asked, but not before with savoury cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He amply had his wearied strength restored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If in that tract, by errant cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Often adventurous quest might be explored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In which a man might prove, by dangerous deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If blame or glory were his fitting meed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>They answered, in those woods he might be sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many and strange adventures would be found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But deeds, there wrought, were, like the place, obscure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for the greater part, not bruited round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Then seek (they said) a worthier quest, secure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your works will not be buried underground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that the glorious act achieved, as due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fame may your peril and your pain pursue.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And if you would your warlike worth assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prepare the worthiest enterprize to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, e’er in times of old or present day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was undertaken by a cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our monarch’s daughter needs some friendly stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now sore bested, against a puissant peer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lurcanio is the doughty baron’s name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would bereave her both of life and fame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Her he before her father does pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perchance yet more for hatred than for right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vouches, to a gallery she updrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lover, seen by him, at dead of night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence death by fire will be the damsel’s due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such is our law, unless some champion fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On her behalf, and, ere a month go by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Nigh spent) upon the accuser prove the lie.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Our impious Scottish law, severe and dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wills, that a woman, whether low or high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her state, who takes a man into her bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Except her husband, for the offence shall die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor is there hope of ransom for her head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless to her defence some warrior hie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as her champion true, with spear and shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Maintain her guiltless in the listed field.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>“The king, sore grieving for Geneura bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such is his unhappy daughter’s name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proclaims by town and city, that the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who shall deliver her from death and shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to the royal damsel will unite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With dower, well suited to a royal dame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that the valiant warrior who has stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In her defence, be come of gentle blood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“But if within a month no knight appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or coming, conquer not, the damsel dies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A like emrpize were worthier of your spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than wandering through these woods in lowly guise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besides, the eternal trophy you shall rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You by the deed shall gain a glorious prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sweetest flower of all the ladies fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That betwixt Ind and Atlas’ pillars are.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And you with wealth and state shall guerdoned be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that you evermore may live content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the king’s grace, if through your means he see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His honour raised anew, now well-nigh spent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besides, you by the laws of chivalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are bound to venge the damsel foully shent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For she, whose life is by such treason sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is chaste and spotless in the common thought.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo mused awhile, and then replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“And must a gentle damsel die by fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because she with a lover’s wish complied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And quenched within her arms his fond desire?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cursed be the law by which the dame is tried!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cursed he who would permit a doom so dire!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perish (such fate were just!) who cruel proves!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not she that life bestows on him who loves.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Or true or false Geneura’s tale of shame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she her lover blessed I little heed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this my praise the lady well might claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If manifest were not that gentle deed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My every thought is turned to aid the dame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grant me but one to guide my steps, and lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quickly to where the foul accuser stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I trust in God to loose Geneura’s bands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“I will not vouch her guiltless in my thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fear to warrant what is false; but I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Boldly maintain, in such an act is nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For which the damsel should deserve to die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ween unjust, or else of wit distraught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who statutes framed of such severity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, as iniquitous, should be effaced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with a new and better code replaced.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“If like desire, and if an equal flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Move one and the other sex, who warmly press</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To that soft end of love (their goal the same)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to the witless crowd seems rank excess;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say why shall woman⁠—merit scathe or blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though lovers, one or more, she may caress;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While man to sin with whom he will is free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And meets with praise, not mere impunity?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“By this injurious law, unequal still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On woman is inflicted open wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to demonstrate it a grievous ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I trust in God, which has been borne too long.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To good Rinaldo’s sentence, with one will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming their sires unjust, assents the throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their sires who such outrageous statute penned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And king, who might, but does not, this amend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When the new dawn, with streaks of red and white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Broke in the east, and cleared the hemisphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo took his steed and armour bright:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A squire that abbey furnished to the peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him, for many leagues and miles, the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pricked through the dismal forest dark and drear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While they towards the Scottish city ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the poor damsel’s cause is to be tried.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Seeking their way to shorten as they wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They to the wider track a path preferred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When echoing through the gloomy forest round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loud lamentations nigh the road were heard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards a neighbouring vale, whence came the sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This his Bayardo, that his hackney spurred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And viewed, between two grisly ruffians there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A girl, who seemed at distance passing fair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>But woe begone and weeping was the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As ever damsel dame, or wight was seen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hard by the barbarous twain prepared the blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To deluge with that damsel’s blood the green.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She to delay her death awhile essayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until she pity moved with mournful mien.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This when Rinaldo near approaching eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thither drives with threats and furious cries.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The ruffians turn their backs and take to flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as they the distant succour view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And squat within a valley out of sight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor cares the good Rinaldo to pursue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her approaching, sues Mount Alban’s knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To say what on her head such evil drew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, to save time, commands his squire to stoop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And take the damsel on his horse’s croup.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>And as the lady nearer he surveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her wise behaviour marked and beauty’s bloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though her fait countenance was all dismayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the fear of death o’erspread with gloom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again to know, the gentle knight essayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had prepared for her so fell a doom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she began to tell in humble tone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What to another canto I postpone.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
