<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-10" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Another love assails Bireno’s breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who leaves one night Olympia on the shore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Logistilla’s holy realm addressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rogero goes, nor heeds Alcina more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him, of that flying courser repossest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hippogryph on airy voyage bore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence he the good Rinaldo’s levy sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And next Angelica beholds and frees.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Of all the loves, of all fidelity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet proved, of all the constant hearts and true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all the lovers, in felicity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or sorrow faithful found, a famous crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Olympia I would give the first degree</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than second: if this be not due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I well may say that hers no tale is told</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of truer love, in present times or old.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>And this she by so many proofs and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had made apparent to the Zealand lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No woman’s faith more certain could appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To man, though he her open heart explored:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if fair truth such spirits should endear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they in mutual love deserve reward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bireno as himself, nay, he above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself, I say, should kind Olympia love.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Not only should he nevermore deceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her for another, were that woman she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who so made Europe and wide Asia grieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or fairer yet, if one more fair there be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But rather that quit her the light should leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what is sweet to taste, touch, hear, and see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And life and fame, and all beside; if aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More precious can in truth be styled, or thought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>If her Bireno loved, as she had loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bireno, if her love he did repay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With faith like hers, and still with truth unmoved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Veered not his shifting sail another way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or ingrate for such service⁠—cruel proved</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such fair love and faith, I now will say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And you with lips comprest and eye-brows bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall listen to the tale for wonderment;</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>And when you shall have heard the impiety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which of such passing goodness was the meed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Woman take warning from this perfidy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let none make a lover’s word her creed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mindless that God does all things hear and see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lover, eager his desires to speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaps promises and vows, aye prompt to swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which afterwards all winds disperse in air.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>The promises and empty vows dispersed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In air, by winds all dissipated go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After these lovers have the greedy thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeased, with which their fevered palates glow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this example which I offer, versed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their prayers and tears to credit be more slow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cheaply, dear ladies mine, is wisdom bought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By those who wit at other’s cost are taught.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>Of those in the first flower of youth beware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose visage is so soft and smooth to sight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For past, as soon as bred, their fancies are;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like a straw-fire their every appetite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So the keen hunter follows up the hare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In heat and cold, on shore, or mountain-height;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, when ’tis taken, more esteems the prize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And only hurries after that which flies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Such is the practice of these striplings who,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time you treat them with austerity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love and revere you, and such homage do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As those who pay their service faithfully;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But vaunt no sooner victory, than you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From mistresses shall servants grieve to be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mourn to see the fickle love they owed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From you diverted, and elsewhere bestowed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>I not for this (for that were wrong) opine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That you should cease to love; for you, without</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lover, like uncultivated vine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would be, that has no prop to wind about.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the first down I pray you to decline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fly the volatile, inconstant rout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make your choice the riper fruits among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet to gather what too long has hung.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>A daughter they have found (above was said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the proud king who ruled the Friesland state;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That with Bireno’s brother was to wed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As far as rumour tells; but to relate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The truth, a longing in Bireno bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sight of food so passing delicate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he to talk his palate deemed would be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For other’s sake, a foolish courtesy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>The gentle damsel had not past fourteen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was beautiful and fresh, and like a rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When this first opening from its bud is seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the vernal sun expands and grows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To say Bireno loved the youthful queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were little; with less blaze lit tinder glows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or ripened corn, wherever envious hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of foe amid the grain has cast a brand,</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>Than that which on Bireno’s bosom fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to his marrow burned; when, weeping sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fate of her unhappy father dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He saw her bathed in ceaseless tears deplore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as cold water, on the cauldron shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shops short the bubbling wave, which boiled before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So was the raging rife Olympia blew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within his breast, extinguished by a new.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor feels Bireno mere satiety;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He loathes her so, he ill endures her sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if his hope he long deferred, will die:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For other such his fickle appetite!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet till the day prefixed to satisfy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His fond desire, so feigns the wary knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olympia less to love than to adore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He seems, and but her pleasure to explore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And if the other he too much caress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who cannot <em>but</em> caress her, there are none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See evil in the deed, but rather guess</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It is in pity, is in goodness done:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since to raise up and comfort in distress</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom Fortune’s wheel beats down in changeful run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was never blamed; with glory oftener paid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—So much the more, a young⁠—a harmless maid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>Almighty God! how fallible and vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is human judgment, dimmed by clouds obscure!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bireno’s actions, impious and profane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By others are reputed just and pure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already stooping to their oars, the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have loosed his vessel from the port secure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the duke and his companions steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Zealand through the deep, with meery cheer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Already Holland and its headlands all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are left astern, and now descried no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since to shun Friesland they to larboard hawl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And keep their course more nigh the Scottish shore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When they are overtaken by a squall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And drive three days the open sea before:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the third, when now, near eventide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A barren and unpeopled isle is spied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>As soon as they were harboured in a hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olympia landed and the board was spread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She there contented, with the faithless knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Supt, unsuspecting any cause for dread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence, with Bireno, where a tent was pight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In pleasant place, repaired, and went to bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The others of their train returned abroad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rested in their ship, in haven moored.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The fear and late sea sorrow, which had weighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So long upon the dame and broke her rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The finding herself safe in greenwood shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Removed from noise, and, for her tranquil breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Knowing her lover was beside her laid)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No further thoughts, no further cares molest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olympia lap in slumber so profound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No sheltered bear or dormouse sleeps more sound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The lover false, who, hatching treason lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stole from his bed in silence, when he knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She slept: his clothes he in a bundle ties,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor other raiment on his body threw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then issuing forth from the pavilion hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if on new-born wings, towards his crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, roused, unmoor without a cry, as he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Commands, and loosen thence and put to sea.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>Behind the land was left; and there to pine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olympia, who yet slept the woods among;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till from her gilded wheels the frosty rhine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aurora upon earth beneath had flung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the old woe, beside the tumbling brine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lamenting, halcyons mournful descant sung;<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When she, ’twixt sleep and waking, made a strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To reach her loved Bireno, but in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>She no one found; the dame her arm withdrew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She tried again, yet no one found; she spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both arms, now here, now there, and sought anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now either leg; but yet no better sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fear banished sleep; she oped her eyes: in view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was nothing: she no more her widowed bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would keep, but from the couch in fury sprung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And headlong forth from the pavilion flung,</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>And seaward ran, her visage tearing sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Presaging, and now certain of her plight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She beat her bosom, and her tresses tore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And looked (the moon was shining) if she might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discover any thing beside the shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, save the shore, was any thing in sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She calls Bireno, and the caverns round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pitying her grief, Bireno’s name rebound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>On the far shore there rose a rock; below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scooped by the breaker’s beating frequently:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cliff was hollowed underneath, in show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of arch, and overhung the foaming sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olympia (MIND such vigour did bestow)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sprang up the frowning crest impetuously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, at a distance, stretched by favouring gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence saw her cruel lord’s departing sail:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Saw it, or seemed to see: for ill her eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Things through the air, yet dim and hazy, view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She falls, all-trembling, on the ground, and lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With face than snow more cold and white in hue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when she has again found strength to rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guiding her voice towards the bark which flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calling with all her might, the unhappy dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calls often on her cruel consort’s name.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Where unavailing was the feeble note,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She wept and clapt her hands in agony.<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Without its freight,” she cried, “thy ship does float.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Where, cruel, dost thou fly<a/> so swiftly?⁠—me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Receive as well:⁠—small hinderance to thy boat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which bears my spirit, would my body be.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she her raiment waving in her hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Signed to the frigate to return to land.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>But the loud wind which, sweeping ocean, bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The faithless stripling’s sail across the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bears off as well the shriek, and moan, and prayers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of sad Olympia, sorrowing on the steep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thrice, cruel to herself, the dame prepares</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the high rock amid the waves to leap.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But from the water lifts at length her sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there returns where she had passed the night.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Stretched on the bed, upon her face she lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bathing it with her tears. “Last night in thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together two found shelter,” did she say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Alas! why two together are not we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At rising? False Bireno! cursed day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I was born! What here remains to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To do? What can be done?⁠—Alone, betrayed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who will console me, who afford me aid?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Nor man I see, nor see I work, which shows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That man inhabits in this isle; nor I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See ship, in which (a refuge from my woes),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embarking, I from hence may hope to fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here shall I starve; nor any one to close</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My eyes, or give me sepulture, be by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save wolf perchance, who roves this wood, a tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give me, alas! in his voracious womb.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“I live in terror, and appear to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rough bear or lion issue even now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or tiger, from beneath the greenwood tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or other beast with teeth and claws: but how</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can ever cruel beast inflict on me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O cruel beast, a fouler death than thou?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enough for them to slay me once! while I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Am made by thee a thousand deaths to die.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“But grant, e’en now, some skipper hither fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who may for pity bear me hence away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that I so eschew wolf, lion, bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Torture, and dearth, and every horrid way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of death; to Holland shall he take me, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thee is guarded fortilage and bay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or take me to the land where I was born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If this thou hast from me by treachery torn?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Thou, with pretence, from me my state didst wrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of our connection and of amity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And quickly of my land thy troops possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To assure the rule unto thyself. Shall I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return to Flanders where I sold the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though little, upon which I lived, to buy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thee needful succour and from prison bear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wretch, whither shall I go?⁠—I know not where.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Can I to Friesland go, where I to reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As queen was called, and this for thee forewent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where both my brethren and my sire were slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every other good from me was rent?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thee would I not, thou ingrate, with my pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reproach, not therefore deal thee punishment:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well as I, the story dost thou know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, see the meed thou dost for this bestow!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Oh! may I but escape the wild corsair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor taken be, and after sold for slave!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than this may lion, wolf, or bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tiger, or other beast, if fiercer rave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me with his claws and rushes rend and tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And drag my bleeding body to his cave.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So saying she her golden hair offends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lock by lock the scattered tresses rends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>She to the shore’s extremest verge anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tossing her head, with hair dishevelled, run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seemed like maid beside herself, and who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was by ten fiends possessed, instead of one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of like the frantic Hecuba, at view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of murdered Polydore, her infant son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fixed on a stone she gazed upon the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor less than real stone seemed stone to be.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>But let her grieve till my return. To show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now of the child I wish: his weary way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, in the noon’s intensest glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Takes by the shore: the burning sunbeams play</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the hill and thence rebound; below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Boils the white sand; while heated with the ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Little is wanting in that journey dire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that the arms he wears are all on fire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>While to the warrior thirst and labour sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still toiling through that heavy sand, as he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursued his path along the sunny shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were irksome and displeasing company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the shadow of a turret hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which rose beside the beach, amid the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He found three ladies of Alcina’s court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As such distinguished by their dress and port.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Reclined on Alexandrian carpets rare<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ladies joyed the cool in great delight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About them various wines in vessels were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every sort of comfit nicely dight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fast by, and sporting with the ripple there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lay, waiting on their needs, a pinnace light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until a breeze should fill her sail anew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For then no breath upon the waters blew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>They, who beheld along the shifting sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero wend, upon his way intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw thirst figured on his lips, and scanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His troubled visage, all with sweat besprent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Began to pray, “on what he had in hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would not show his heart so deeply bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that he in the cool and grateful shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would rest his weary limbs, beside them laid.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>To hold the stirrup one approaching near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would aid him to alight: the other bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cup of chrystal to the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With foaming wine, which raised his thirst the more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to the music of their speech no ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He lent, who weened if he his way forbore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For anything, each lett would time supply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Alcina to arrive, who now was nigh.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>Now so saltpetre fine and sulphur pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Touched with the fiery spark, blaze suddenly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not so loud ocean raves, when the obscure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whirlwind descends and camps in middle sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As viewing thus the knight proceed secure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his journey, and aware that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scorns them, who yet believe they beauteous are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kindled the third of those three damsels fair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>As loud as she could raise her voice, she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Thou art not gentle, nor art thou a knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hast from other arms and horse conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which never could be thine by better right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So be thy theft, if well I guess, appaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By death, which this may worthily requite!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foul thief, churl, haughty ingrate, may I thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Burned, gibbeted, or cut in quarters see!”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>Beside all these and more injurious cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the proud damsel at the warrior throws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though to her taunts Rogero nought replies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who weens small fame from such a contest flows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She with her sisters to the frigate hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which waits them, and aboard the tender goes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And plying fast her oars, pursues the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Along the sandy beach, still kept in sight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>On him with threat and curse she ever cried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose tongue collected still fresh cause for blame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile, where to the lovelier fairy’s side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The passage lay across a straight, he came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there an ancient ferryman espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Put from the other shore with punctual aim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if forewarned and well prepared, the seer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waited the coming of the cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The ferryman put forth the Child to meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bear him to a better shore rejoicing: he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared as all benign and all discreet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If of the heart the face is warranty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Giving God thanks, Rogero took his seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aboard the bark, and passed the quiet sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discoursing with that ancient pilot, fraught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With wisdom, and by long experience taught.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>He praised Rogero much, that he had fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In time from false Alcina, and before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him the dame had given the chalice dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her lover’s final guerdon evermore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next that he had to Logistilla sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he should duly witness holy lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And beauty infinite and grace enjoy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which feed and nourish hearts they never cloy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Her shall you, struck with wonderment, revere,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(He said), “when first you shall behold the fay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But better contemplate her lofty cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And you no other treasure shall appay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this her love from other differs; fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hope in other on the bosom prey:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In hers Desire demands not aught beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the blessing seen is satisfied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“You shall in nobler studies be professed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tutored by her, than bath and costly fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Song, dance, and perfumes; as how fashioned best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your thoughts may tower more high than hawks in air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how some of the glory of the blest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You here may in the mortal body share.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So speaking, and yet distant from the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the safe bank approached the pilot hoar.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When he beholds forth-issuing from the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fleet of ships, which all towards him steer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With these came wronged Alcina, with a band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of many vassals, gathered far and near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To risk the ruin of herself and land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or repossess the thing she held so dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love, no light cause, incites the dame aggrieved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor less the bitter injury received.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Such choler she had never felt before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that which now upon her bosom fed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence she made her followers ply the oar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till the white foam on either bank was shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The deafening noise and din o’er sea and shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By echo every where repeated, spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Now⁠—now, Rogero, bare the magic shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or in the strife be slain, or basely yield:”</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>Thus Logistilla’s pilot; and beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So saying, seized the pouch, wherein was dight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The buckler, and the covering torn aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exposed to open view the shining light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The enchanted splendor, flashing far and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So sore offends the adversaries’ sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They from their vessels drop amazed and blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tumbling from prow before, and poop behind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>One who stood sentry on the citadel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descried the navy of the invading dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And backwards rang the castle larum-bell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence speedy succours to the haven came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The artillery rained like storm, whose fury fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On all who would Rogero scathe and shame:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that such aid was brought him in the strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As saved the warrior’s liberty and life.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>Four ladies are arrived upon the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither by Logistilla sped in haste:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leagued with the valiant Anrondica stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fronesia sage, Dicilla good, and chaste</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sofrosina, who, as she has in had</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than the others, ’mid the foremost placed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conspicuous flames. Forth issues from the fort</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A matchless host, and files towards the port.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Beneath the castle, safe from wind and swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of many ships and stout, a squadron lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, in the harbour, at a sound from bell⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A word, were fit for action, night or day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus by land and sea was battle, fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And furious, waged on part of either fay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence was Alcina’s realm turned upside down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of which she had usurped her sister’s crown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Oh! of how many battles the success</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is different from what was hoped before!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only failed the dame to repossess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As thought, her lover flying from her shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But out of ships, even now so numberless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ample ocean scarce the navy bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From all her vessels, to the flames a prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with one bark escaped the wretched fay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>Alcina flies; and her sad troop around</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Routed and taken, burnt or sunk, remains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To have lost Rogero, sorrow more profound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wakes in her breast than all her other pains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she in bitter tears for ever drowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the Child’s loss by night and day complains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bent to end her woes, with many a sigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Often laments her that she cannot die.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>No fairy dies, or can, while overhead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sun shall burn, or heaven preserve their stile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Clotho had been moved to cut her thread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Touched by such grief; or, as on funeral pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair Dido, she beneath the steel had bled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or, haply, like the gorgeous Queen of Nile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In mortal slumber would have closed her eye:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But fairies cannot at their pleasure die.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Return we, where eternal fame is due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving Alcina in her trouble sore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I speak of valorous Rogero, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had disembarked upon the safer shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He turned his back upon the waters blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Giving God thanks for all with pious lore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on dry ground now landed, made repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the lofty castle planted there.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Than this a stronger or more bright in show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was never yet before of mortal sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or after, viewed; with stones the ramparts glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More rich than carbuncle or diamond bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We of like gems discourse not here below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he who would their nature read aright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must thither speed: none such elsewhere, I ween,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Except perhaps in heaven above, are seen.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>What gives to them superiority</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er every other sort of gem, confessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is, man in these his very soul may see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His vices and his virtues see expressed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence shall he after heed no flattery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet by wrongful censure be depressed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His form he in the lucid mirror eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the knowledge of himself grows wise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>Their rays, which imitate the sunshine, fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All round about with such a flood of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he who has them, Phoebus, may at will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Create himself a day, in thy despite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor only marvellous the gems; the skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the artificer and substance bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So well contend for mastery, of the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis hard to judge where preference is due.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>On arches raised, whereon the firmament</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seemed to repose as props, so fair in show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are lovely gardens, and of such extent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As even would be hard to have below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clustering ’twixt lucid tower or battlement,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Green odoriferous shrubs are seen to grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which through the summer and the winter shoot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And teem with beauteous blossom and ripe fruit.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Never in any place such goodly tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is grown, except within these gardens fine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or rose, or violet of like quality,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lilies, or amaranth, or jessamine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Elsewhere it seems as if foredoomed to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Born with one sun, to live and to decline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon its widowed stalk the blossom dies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Subject to all the changes of the skies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But here the verdure still is permanent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still permanent the eternal blossoms are;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that kind nature, in her government,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So nicely tempers here the genial air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that, unneeding any influence lent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By planet, Logistilla’s zeal and care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ever keep fast (what may appear a thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impossible) her own perpetual spring.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>That such a gentle lord had sought her rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did much the prudent Logistilla please,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she commanded he should be carest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all should seek to do him courtesies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sometime had Sir Astolpho been her guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom with a joyful heart Rogero sees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There in few days resorted all the crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Changed by Melissa to their shapes anew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>When they a day or more their weariness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had eased, Rogero sought the prudent fay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him the duke Astolpho, who no less</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desired to measure back his western way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melissa was for both embassadress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for the warlike pair, with humble say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To favour, warn and help them, prayed the dame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that they might return from whence they came.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“I” (said the fay) “will think upon this need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in two days the pair will expedite.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then thought how good Rogero she should speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And afterwards how aid the English knight.<a/><!--Footnote--></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She wills the first shall, on the griffin steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the Aquitanian shores direct his flight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first will fashion for the flying-horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A bit, to guide him and restrain his course.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>She shows him what to do, if he on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would make him soar, or down to earth would bring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what, would he in circles make him fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or swiftly speed, or pause upon the wing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all that skilful horsemen use to try</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon plain ground, beneath her tutoring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero learned in air, and gained dominion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Over the griffin-steed of soaring pinion.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When at all points Rogero was prepared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bade farewell to the protecting fay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ever to the loving knight endeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And issued from her realm upon his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I first of him, who on his journey fared</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In happy hour, and afterwards shall say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the English knight, who spent more time and pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeking the friendly court of Charlemagne.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero thence departs; but as before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Takes not the way he took in his despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When him above the sea the courser bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seldom was the land beneath in sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But taught to make him beat his wings and soar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here, there, as liked him best, with docile flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returning, he another path pursued;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Magi erst, who Herod’s snare eschewed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Borne hither, good Rogero, leaving Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had sought, in level line, the Indian lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where they are watered by the Eastern main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the two fairies strove with hostile bands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He now resolved to visit other reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than that where Aeolus his train commands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And finish so the round he had begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Circling the world beneath him like the sun.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Here the Catày, and there he Mangiane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Passing the great Quinsay<a/> beheld; in air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above Imavus turned, and Sericane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left on the right; and thence did ever bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the north Scythians to the Hyrcanian main:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So reached Sarmatia’s distant land; and, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Europe and Asia’s parted climes divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Russ, Prussian, he and Pomeranian spied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Although the Child by every wish was pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quickly to seek his Bradamant, yet he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With taste of roving round the world possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would not desist from it, till Hungary</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had seen; and Polacks, Germans, and the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should in his wide extended circuit see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inhabiting that horrid, northern land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And came at last to England’s farthest strand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet think not, sir, that in so long a flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior is for ever on the wing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who lodges, housed in tavern every night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As best as can, through his capacious ring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So nights and days he passes: such delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prospects to him of land and ocean bring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived one morn nigh London-town, he stopt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And over Thames the flying courser dropt.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Where he in meadows to the city nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saw troops of men at arms, and footmen spread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, to the drum and trumpet marching by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Divided into goodly bands, were led</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before Rinaldo, flower of chivalry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He that (if you remember it) was said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To have been sent by Charlemagne, and made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His envoy to these parts in search of aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero came exactly as the show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that fair host was made without the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of a knight the occasion sought to know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But from the griffin-horse first lighted down:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he who courteous was, informed him how</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of kingdoms holding of the British crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">English, Scotch, Irish, and the Islands nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those many banners were, upreared on high:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And added, having ended this display</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of arms, the troops would file towards the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where vessels anchored in the harbour lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waiting to bear them to another land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“The French beseiged, rejoice in this array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hope (he said) deliverance through the band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that I may of all inform you well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I of each troop shall separately tell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Lo! where yon mighty banner planted stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which pards and flower-de-luces does unfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That our great captain to the wind expands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under whose ensign are the rest enrolled:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior’s name, renowned throughout these lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is Leonetto, flower of all the bold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lancaster’s duke, and nephew to the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Valiant in war, and wise in counselling.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“That next the royal gonfalon, which stirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By fluttering wind, is borne towards the mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which on green field, three pinions of a bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bears agent, speaks Sir Richard, Warwick’s count.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Duke of Gloucester’s blazon is the third,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two antlers of a stag, and demi-front;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Duke of Clarence shows a torch, and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is Duke of York who bears that verdant tree.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Upon the Duke of Norfolk’s gonfalon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You see a lance into three pieces broke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thunder on the Earl of Kent’s; upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pembroke’s a griffin; underneath a yoke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Essex’s, conjoined, two snakes are shown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By yonder lifted balance is bespoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Duke of Suffolk; and Northumbria’s Earl</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A garland does on azure field unfurl.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Arundel’s Earl is yonder cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose banner bears a foundering bark! In sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The next, is Berkeley’s noble Marquis; near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are March and Richmond’s Earls: the first on white</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shows a cleft mount; a palm the second peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A pine amid the waves the latter knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The next of Dorset and Southampton’s town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are earls; this bears a car, and that a crown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“The valiant Raymond, Earl of Devon, bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hawk, which spreads her wings above her nest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While or and sable he of Worcester wears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Derby’s a dog, a bear is Oxford’s crest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There, as his badge, a cross of chrystal rears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bath’s wealthy prelate, camped among the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The broken seat on dusky field, next scan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Somerset’s good duke, Sir Ariman.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Forty-two thousand muster in array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The men at arms and mounted archers there.<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By a hundred I misreckon not, or they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fighting footmen, twice as many are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those ensigns yellow, brown, and green, survey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that striped blue and black. The foot repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each to his separate flag where these are spread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Godfrey, Henry, Hermant, Edward, led.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The first is the Duke of Buckingham; and he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The next, is Henry, Earl of Salisbury;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Old Hermant Aberga’nny hold in fee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Edward is the Earl of Shrewsbury.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In those who yonder lodge, the English see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Camped eastward; and now westward turn your eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where you shall thirty thousand Scots, a crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Led by their monarch’s son, Zerbino, view.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“The lion ’twixt two unicorns behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the standard of the Scottish king!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which has a sword of silver in its hold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There camps his son: of all his following</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is none so beauteous: nature broke the mould</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In which she cast him, after fashioning</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her work: Is none in whom such chivalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And valour shines. The Duke of Rothsay he!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Behold the Earl of Huntley’s flag display</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon an azure field a gilded bar:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that a leopard in the toils survey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bearing of the noble Duke of Mar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With many birds, and many colours gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See Alcabrun’s, a valiant man in war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who neither duke, nor count, nor marquis hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is in his savage country first of right.<a/></span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“The Duke of Strathforth<a/> shows the bird, who strains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His daring eyes to keep the sun in view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Earl Lurcanio, that in Angus reigns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A bull, whose flanks are torn by deerhounds two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See there the Duke of Albany, who stains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His ensign’s field with colours white and blue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Earl of Buchan next his banner bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In which a dragon vert a vulture tears.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Herman, the lord of Forbes, conducts that band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stripes his gonfalon with black and white;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Errol’s earl upon his better hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who on a field of green displays a light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now see the Irish, next the level land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into two squadrons ordered for the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kildare’s redoubted earl commands the first;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lord Desmond leads the next, in mountains nursed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“A burning pine by Kildare is displayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Desmond on white field a crimson bend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor only England, Scotland, Ireland, aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Charlemagne; but to assist him wend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Swede and Norse, and succours are conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Thule, and the farthest Iceland’s end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All lands that round them lie, in fine, increase</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His host, by nature enemies to peace.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Issued from cavern and from forest brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They sixteen thousand are, or little less;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Visage, legs, arms, and bosom overgrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hair, like beasts. Lo! yonder, where they press</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About a standard white, the level down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of lances seems a bristling wilderness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such Moray’s flag, the savage squadron’s head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who means with Moorish blood to paint it red.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>What time Rogero sees the fair array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose bands to succour ravaged France prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And notes and talks of ensigns they display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And names of British lords, to him repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One and another, crowding to survey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His courser, single of its kind, or rare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All thither hasten, wondering and astound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And compassing the warrior, form a round.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>So that to raise more wonder in the train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to make better sport, as him they eyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero shook the flying courser’s rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lightly with the rowels touched his side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He towards heaven, uprising, soared amain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And left behind each gazer stupefied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having from end to end the English force</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So viewed, he next for Ireland shaped his course;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>And saw fabulous Hibernia, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The goodly, sainted elder made the cave,<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In which men cleansed from all offences are;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such mercy there, it seems, is found to save.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence o’er that sea he spurred, through yielding air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose briny waves the lesser Britain lave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, looking down, Angelica descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In passing, to the rock with fetters tied;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Bound to the naked rock upon the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the isle of tears; for the isle of tears was hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That which was peopled by the inhuman band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So passing fierce and full of foul despite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who (as I told above) on every hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cruized with their scattered fleet by day or night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every beauteous woman bore away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Destined to be a monster’s evil prey:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>There but that morning bound in cruel wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where (to devour a living damsel sped)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The orc, that measureless sea-monster, hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which on abominable food is fed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How on the beach the maid became the prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the rapacious crew, above was said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who found her sleeping near the enchanter hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who her had thither brought by magic lore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>The cruel and inhospitable crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the voracious beast the dame expose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the sea-beat shore, as bare to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As nature did at first her work compose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not even a veil she had, to shade the hue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the white lily and vermillion rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which mingled in her lovely members meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proof to December-snow and July-heat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Her would Rogero have some statue deemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of alabaster made, or marble rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to the rugged rock so fastened seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the industrious sculptor’s cunning care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that he saw distinct a tear which streamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid fresh-opening rose and lily fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stand on her budding paps beneath in dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that her golden hair dishevelled flew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And as he fastened <em>his</em> on <em>her</em> fair eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His Bradamant he called to mind again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pity and love within his bosom rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At once, and ill he can from tears refrain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in soft tone he to the damsel cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(When he has checked his flying courser’s rein)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“O lady, worthy but that chain to wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With which Love’s faithful servants fettered are,</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And most unworthy this or other ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What wretch has had the cruelty to wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gall those snowy hands with livid stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus painfully with griding fetters bound?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At this she cannot choose but show like grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of crimson spreading on an ivory ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knowing those secret beauties are espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, howsoever lovely, shame would hide;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And gladly with her hands her face would hood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were they not fastened to the rugged stone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with her tears (for this at least she could)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bedewed it, and essayed to hold it down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobbing some while the lovely damsel stood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then loosed her tongue and spake in feeble tone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But ended not; arrested in mid-word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By a loud noise which in the sea was heard.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>Lo! and behold! the unmeasured-beast appears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Half surging and half hidden, in such sort</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As sped by roaring wind long carack steers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From north or south, towards her destined port.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So the sea monster to his food repairs:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now the interval between is short.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Half dead the lady is through fear endured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill by that other’s comfort reassured.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero overhand, not in the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Carries his lance, and beats, with downright blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monstrous orc. What this resembled best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But a huge, writhing mass, I do not know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which wore no form of animal exprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save in the head, with eyes and teeth of sow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His forehead, ’twixt the eyes, Rogero smites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But as on steel or rock the weapon lights.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>When he perceives the first of no avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight returns to deal a better blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The orc, who sees the shifting shadow sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those huge pinions on the sea below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In furious heat, deserts his sure regale</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On shore, to follow that deceitful show:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rolls and reels behind it, as it fleets.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero drops, and oft the stroke repeats.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As eagle, that amid her downward flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surveys amid the grass a snake unrolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or where she smoothes upon a sunny height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her ruffled plumage, and her scales of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assails it not where prompt with poisonous bite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hiss and creep; but with securer hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gripes it behind, and either pinion clangs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest it should turn and wound her with its fangs;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>So the fell orc Rogero does not smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With lance or faulchion where the tushes grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But aims that ’twixt the ears his blow may light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now on the spine, or now on tail below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still in time descends or soars upright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shifts his course, to cheat the veering foe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But as if beating on a jasper block,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can never cleave the hard and rugged rock.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>With suchlike warfare is the mastiff vext</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the bold fly in August’s time of dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or in the month before or in the next,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This full of yellow spikes and that of must;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ever by the circling plague perplext,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose sting into his eyes or snout is thrust:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oft the dog’s dry teeth are heard to fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But reaching once the foe, he pays for all.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVI-->
			<p>
				<span>With his huge tail the troubled waves so sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monster beats, that they ascend heaven-high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the knight knows not if he swim, or soar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his feathered courser in mid sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oft were fain to find himself ashore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, if long time the spray so thickly fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fears it so will bathe his hippogryph,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he shall vainly covet gourd or skiff.<a/></span>
			</p>
			<!--CVII-->
			<p>
				<span>He then new counsel took, and ’twas the best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With other arms the monster to pursue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lifting from his shield the covering vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To dazzle with the light his blasted view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Landward towards the rock-chained maid he pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on her little finger, lest a new</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mischance should follow, slipt the ring, which brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The enchantment of the magic shield to nought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>I say the ring, which Bradamant, to free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, from Brunello’s hand had rent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And which, to snatch him from Alcina, she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had next to India by Melissa sent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melissa (as before was said by me),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In aid of many used the instrument;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to Rogero this again had born;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom ’twas ever on his finger worn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIX-->
			<p>
				<span>He gave it now Angelica; for he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feared lest the buckler’s light should be impaired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And willed as well those beauteous eyes should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Defended, which had him already snared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pressing beneath his paunch full half the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now to the shore the monstrous whale repaired:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Firm stood Rogero, and the veil undone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared to give the sky another sun.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CX-->
			<p>
				<span>He in the monster’s eyes the radiance throws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which works as it was wont in other time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As trout or grayling to the bottom goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In stream, which mountaineer disturbs with lime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So the enchanted buckler overthrows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The orc, reversed among the foam and slime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero here and there the beast astound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still beats, but cannot find the way to wound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXI-->
			<p>
				<span>This while the lady begs him not to bray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Longer the monster’s rugged scale in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“For heaven’s sake turn and loose me” (did she say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still weeping) “ere the orc awake again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bear me with thee, and drown me in mid-way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let me not this foul monster’s food remain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By her just plaint Rogero moved, forebore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Untied the maid, and raised her from the shore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Upon the beach the courser plants his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And goaded by the rowel, towers in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gallops with Rogero in mid seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While on the croup behind him sate the fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who of his banquet so the monster cheat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him too delicate and dainty fare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero turns and with thick kisses plies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady’s snowy breast and sparkling eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He kept no more the way, as he before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proposed, for compassing the whole of Spain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But stopt his courser on the neighbouring shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where lesser Britain runs into the main.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the bank there rose an oakwood hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Philomel for ever seemed to plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ the middle was a meadow with a fountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, at each end, a solitary mountain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>’Twas here the wishful knight first checked the rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dropping in the meadow, made his steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Furl, yet not shut so close, his wings again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he had spread them wide for better speed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Down lights Rogero, and forbears with pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From other leap; but this his arms impede:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His arms impede; a bar to his desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he must doff them would he slake the fire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Now here, now there, confused by different throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero did his shining arms undo:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never the task appeared to him so long;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For where he loosed one knot, he fastened two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, sir, too long continued is this song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And haply may as well have wearied you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that I shall delay to other time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When it may better please, my tedious rhyme.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
