<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-26" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Of mighty matters, sculptured in a font,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does Malagigi to his comrades tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On them come Mandricardo and Rodomont,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forthwith battle follows fierce and fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discord goes scattering quarrel and affront</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid the crew: but whither, forced by spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fair Doralice upon her palfrey speeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Tartar king, and Sarzan, turn their steeds.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>In former ages courteous ladies were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who worshipt virtue, and not worldly gear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Women in this degenerate age are rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom aught else but sordid gain is dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But they who real goodness make their care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor with the avaricious many steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this frail life are worthy to be blest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Held glorious and immortal when at rest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Bradamant well would deathless praise inherit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who nor in wealth nor empire took delight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But in Rogero’s worth, excelling spirit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his unbounded gentlesse; and aright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this did good Duke Aymon’s daughter merit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be beloved of such a valorous knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, what might be for miracles received,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In future ages, for her sake achieved.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>He, with those two of Clermont, as whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To you I in the former canto said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say with Richardet and Aldigier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was gone, to give the prisoned brethren aid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I told, as well how they a cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of haughty look approaching had surveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who bore that noble bird, by fiery birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Renewed, and ever single upon earth.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>When those three of that warrior were espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poised on the wing, as if about to smite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fain by proof their prowess would have tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if their semblance tallied with their might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Is there, among you, one,” the stranger cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Will prove upon me, which is best in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With lance or sword, till one to ground be cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While in the sell his foe is seated fast?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>”⁠—I, at your choice,” said Aldigier, “were fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To flourish faulchion, or to tilt with spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But this with feat, which, if you here remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yourself may witness, so would interfere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That for the present parley time with pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suffices, and yet less for the career.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Six hundred men, or more, we here attend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With whom we must to-day in arms contend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Two of our own to rescue from their foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And free from chains, us Love and Pity sway.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to that stranger next the reason shows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why thus in steel their bodies they array.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“So just is the excuse which you oppose,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—He answered⁠—“that I ill should this gainsay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hold you surely for three cavaliers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That seldom upon earth will find their peers.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>“With you a lance or two I would have crost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To prove how great your prowess in the field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, since ’tis shown me at another’s cost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forego the joust, and to your reasons yield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Warmly I pray your leave against that host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To join with your good arms this helm and shield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hope, if suffered of your band to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No worthless comrade shall you find in me.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Some one, meseems, may crave the stranger’s name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thus the champions on their road delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so to partnership in arms laid claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With those three warriors, for the strife arrayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">SHE⁠—style no more a man that martial dame⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa was; that on Zerbino laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The task to bear about, against his will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ribald Gabrina, prone to every ill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>The two of Clermont and their bold compeer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gladly received her succour in their cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom certes they believed a cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not a damsel, and not what she was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A banner was espied by Aldigier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shown the others, after little pause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which by the wavering wind was blown about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And round about it ranged a numerous rout.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>And when, now nearer, the advancing crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were better marked in Moorish habit stoled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Saracens the stranger band they knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they upon two sorry jades behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ the middle of that troop, the prisoners, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were to the false Maganza to be sold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa cries, “Why is the feast delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When lo! the guests are here, for whom we stayed?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>—“Not all,” Rogero said, “Of the array</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Invited, lacks as yet a numerous part:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A solemn festival is held to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And we. to grace it more, use every art:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet they can now but little more delay.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While thus they parley, they from other part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descry the treacherous Maganzese advance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So all was ready to begin the dance.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>They of Maganza from one quarter steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And laden mules beneath their convoy go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bearing vest, gold, and other costly gear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the other side, mid faulchion, spear, and bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approached the captive two with doleful cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who found themselves awaited by the foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And false and impious Bertolagi heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As with the Moorish captain he conferred.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor Buovo’s nor Duke Aymon’s valiant son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can hold, when that false Maganzese they view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against him both with rested lances run:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He falls the victim of those furious two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through belly and through pummel pierced by one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the other, in mid visage, through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His bleeding cheeks: may like disastrous fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’erwhelm all evil doers, soon or late!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa with Rogero moved her horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At this, nor waited other trumpet-strain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor broke her lance in her impetuous course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till in succession three had prest the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mark well worthy fierce Rogero’s force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim leader in a thought is slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with him, pierced by the same weapon, go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two others to the gloomy realms below.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>’Twas hence a foul mistake the assaulted made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It caused their utter loss, and ruined all:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They of Maganza deemed themselves betrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the infidels, upon their leader’s fall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the other side, so charged with hostile blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moors those Maganzese assassins call;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with fierce slaughter, either angry horde</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Gan bend bow, and brandish lance and sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero, charging this, or the other band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slays ten or twenty, shifting his career;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No fewer by the warlike damsel’s hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are slaughtered and extinguished, there and here:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As many men as feel the murderous brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are from the saddle seen to disappear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before it vanish cuirass, helms and shields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the dry wood to fire in forest yields.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>If ever you remember to have viewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or heard⁠—what time the wasps divided are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the winged college is at feud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mustering their swarms for mischief in mid air⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The greedy swallow swoop amid that brood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To mangle and devour, and kill, and tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You must imagine so, on either part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bold Rogero and Marphisa dart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Not so Sir Richardet and Aldigier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Varied the dance between those squadrons twain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, heedless of the Moors, each cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had but an eye to false Maganza’s train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The brother of Rinaldo, Charles’s peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much courage added to much might and main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these were now redoubled by the spite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which against false Maganza warmed the knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>This cause made him who in his fury shared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Good Buovo’s bastard, seems a lion fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, without pause, each trusty helmet pared</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his good blade, or crushed it like the shell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of brittle egg: and who would not have dared⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would not have shown a Hector’s worth as well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having two such companions in the stower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of warlike wights the very choice and flower?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa, waging all the while the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On her companions often turned to gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as she marked their rivalry in might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Admiring, upon all bestowed her praise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when she on Rogero fixed her sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deemed him unparalleled; and in amaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At times believed that Paladin was Mars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who left his heaven to mix in mortal wars.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>She marvels at the champion’s horrid blows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She marvels how in vain they never fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The iron, smit by Balisarda shows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like paper, not like stubborn plate and shell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To pieces helm and solid corslet goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And men are severed, even to the sell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom into equal parts those strokes divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Half dropt on this, and half on the other side.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>With the same downright stroke, he overbore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The horse and rider, bleeding in the dust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heads of others from their shoulders bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And parted from the hips the bleeding bust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He often at a blow cleft five and more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And⁠—but I doubt who hears me might distrust</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What of a seeming falsehood bears the impress⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I would say more; but I parforce say less.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Good Turpin, he who knows that he tells true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leaves men to believe what they think right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Says of Rogero wondrous things, which you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hearing related, would as falsehoods slight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus, with Marphisa matched, that hostile crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appears like ice, and she like burning light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor her Rogero with less marvel eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she had marked his valour with surprise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>As she had Mars in bold Rogero seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perhaps Bellona he had deemed the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If for a woman he had known that queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who seemed the contrary, in arms arrayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And haply emulation had between</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pair ensued, by whom with cruel blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Most deadly signs of prowess should be shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid that vile herd, on sinew, flesh and bone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>To rout each hostile squadron, filled with dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sufficed the soul and valour of the four;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor better arms remained for them who fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than the sharp goads which on their heels they wore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Happy was he with courser well bested!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By trot or amble they set little store;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he who had no steed, here learned, dismayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How wretched is the poor foot-soldier’s trade.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The conqueror’s prize remained both field and prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor was there footman left nor muleteer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moor took this, Maganza took that way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One leaves the prisoners, and one leaves the gear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With visage glad, and yet with heart more gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The four united each captive cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor were less diligent to free from chains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prisoned pages, and unload the wains.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Besides good quantity of silver fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wrought into different vessels, with a store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of feminine array, of fair design,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embroidered round about with choicest lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And suit of Flemish tapestry, framed to line</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Royal apartments, wrought with silk and ore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—They, ‘mid more costly things in plenty spread⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discovered flasks of wine, and meat and bread.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When now the conquering troop their temples bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All see they have received a damsel’s aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Known by her curling locks of golden hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And delicate and beauteous face displayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her the knights honoured much, and to declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her name, so well deserving glory, prayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor she, that ever was of courteous mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among her friends, their instances withstood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>With viewing her they cannot sate their eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in the battle such had her espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She speaks but with the Child, but him descries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None prizes, values none, ’twould seem, beside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile that ready spread a banquet lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To them is by the servants notified.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This they had served about a neighbouring fountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Screened from the sun by an o’ershadowing mountain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>XXX This spring was one of those four fountains rare, Of those in France produced by Merlin’s sleight; Encompassed round about with marble fair, Shining and polished, and then milk more white. There in the stone choice figures chisseled were, By that magician’s godlike labour dight; Save voice was wanting, these you might have thought Were living and with nerve and spirit fraught.</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Here, to appearance, from the forest prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cruel Beast and hideous to the eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With teeth of wolf, an ass’s head and crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A carcass with long famine lean and dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lion’s claws; a fox in all the rest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which seemed to ravage France and Italy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Spain and England’s desolated strands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Europe and Asia, and in fine all lands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>The beast the low and those of proudest port</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had slain or maimed throughout this earthly ball;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yea, fiercest seemed on those of noble sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sovereign and satrap, prince and peer, to fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made most havoc in the Roman court;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For it had slaughtered Pope and Cardinal:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had filled <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s beauteous seat with scathe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And brought foul scandal on the HOLY FAITH.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Whate’er she touches, wall or rampire steep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Goes to the ground’ where’er the monster wends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each fortress opens; neither castle-keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor city from her rage its wealth defends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Honours divine as well that Beast would reap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seems (while the besotted rabble bends)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And claim withal, as to its keeping given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sacred keys which open Hell and Heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Approaching next, is seen a cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His temples circled with imperial bay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Three youths with him in company appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With golden lilies wrought in their array:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lion seems against that monster drear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To issue, with the same device as they:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The name of these are on the marble read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some on their skirt, some written overhead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Of those who so against Beast advance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One to the hilt has in his life-blood dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His faulchion, Francis styled the first of France;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Austrian Maximilian at his side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In one, who gores his gullet with the lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The emperor Charles the fifth is signified:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Henry the eighth of England is he hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in the monster’s breast a dart has pight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The TENTH, in writing, on his back displayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Lion, who that Beast is seen to hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By both his ears, and him so well has bayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thither troop assistants manifold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twould seem the world all fear aside has laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in amendment of their errors old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thitherward nobles troop, but these are few;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so that hideous Beast those hunters slew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>In wonder stood long time that warlike train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desirous, as the storied work they traced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To know by hands of whom that Beast was slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had so many smiling lands defaced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The names unknown to them, though figured plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the marble which that fountain cased:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They one another prayed, if any guessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That story, he would tell it to the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Vivian on Malagigi turned his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who listening stood this while, yet spake he nought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“With thee,” he cried, “to tell the meaning lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who are they, by whose darts and lances dies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That shouldst by what I see in this be taught:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hideous monster, that to bay is brought?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—And Malagigi⁠—“Hitherto their glory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No author has consigned to living story.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“The chiefs whose names are graved upon the stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not yet have moved upon this worldly stage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But will within seven hundred years be known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the great honour of a future age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time king Arthur filled the British throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This fountain Merlin made, enchanter sage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who things to come upon the marble fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made sculpture by a cunning artist’s care.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>“This Beast, when weights and measures first were found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came out of nether hell; when on the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Common before, men fixed the landmark’s bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fashioned written pacts with jealous pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet walked not every where, at first, her round:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unvisited she left yet many a reign:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through diverse places in our time she wends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the vile rabble and the crowd offends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>“From the beginning even to our day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye has that monster grown, and aye will grow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And till much time be past will grow alway:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was never mightier, nor worse cause of woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Python, oft the theme of ancient lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So passing wonderful and fierce in show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came not by half this loathsome monster nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all its foulness and deformity.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Dread desolation shall it make; nor place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will unpolluted or untainted be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And you in the mysterious sculptured trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But little of its foul iniquity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The world, when weary of imploring grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those worthy peers (whose names you sculptured see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And which shall blazing carbuncle outshine),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To succour in its utmost need combine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“No one shall more that cruel beast molest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Francis, who the realm of France will steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who justly shall be forward in this quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom none shall go beyond, whom few shall peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since he in splendour, as in all the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wanting in worth, will many make appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who whilom perfect seemed; so fade and yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All lesser glories to the sun revealed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“In the first year of his successful reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The crown yet ill secure upon his front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He threads the Alps, and makes their labour vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would against his arms maintain the Mount.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impelled by generous and by just disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The unavenged as yet is that affront,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which a French army suffered from their rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who poured from beast-cote, field, and pasturage:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>“And thence shall into the rich Lombard plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descend, with all the flower of France, and so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall break the Switzer, that henceforth in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would he uplift his horn against the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the sore scandal of the Church and Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the Florentine’s much scathe and woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him that famous castle shall be quelled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which inexpugnable whilere was held.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“In quelling it his honoured faulchion, more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than other arms, availing shall be found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which first that cruel Beast to death will gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The foul destroyer of each country round:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Parforce will every standard fly before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That conquering faulchion, or be cast to ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, stormed by it, will rampart, fosse, or wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Secure the city, they surround, from fall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Imbued with every generous quality,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which can in great commander be combined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Prudence like his who won Thrasymenae</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Trebbia’s field, with Caesar’s daring mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Alexander’s fortune, him I see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without which all designs are mist and wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Withal, so passing liberal, I in none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mark his example or his parragon.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>So Malagigi to his comrades said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And moved in them desire some name to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of others, who had laid that monster dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to slay others had been used whilere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among the first Bernardo’s name was read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much vaunted in the writing of the Seer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who said, “Through him as known as Bibbiena</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As her own neighbour Florence and Siena.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“More forward in this chase shall no one show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Sigismond, than Lewis, and than John;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each to that hideous beast a cruel foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One a Gonzaga, one of Arragon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one a Salviati: with them go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Francis Gonzaga and Frederick his son:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brother and son-in-law, their aid afford;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One chief Ferrara’s, one Urbino’s lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>“Of one of these the son, Sir Guidobald,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will not by sire, or other, distanced be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Ottobon de Flisco, Sinibald</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chases the Beast, both striving equally:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lewis de Gazolo its neck has galled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With one of those keen darts, Apollo’s fee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Given with his bow, what time as well his glaive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The god of war, to gird that warrior, gave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Two Hercules and two Hippolyti</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Este, a Hercules and Hippolyte</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the Gonzagas’ and the Medici,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hunt and fatigue the monster in his flight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Julian lets his good son pass him by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor bold Ferrant his brother; nor less wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is Andrew Doria; nor by any one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is Francis Sforza in the chase outdone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Of good Avalo’s glorious lineage bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two chiefs that mountain for their bearing show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, hiding him, from dragon-feet to head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wicked Typheus seems to keep below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Mid those combined, to lay the monster dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall none more forward than this couple go:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him Francis of Pescara names the text;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alphonso, hight of Guasto, is the next.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“But where leave I Gonsalvo Ferrant, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is held in such esteem, the pride of Spain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So praised by Malagigi, that him few</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equal among the worthies of that train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">William, surnamed of Monferrato, view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Mid those that have the hideous monster slain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But these are few compared with numbers round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom that despiteous Beast shall kill or wound.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>To converse gay the friends themselves addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seemly pastimes, when their meal was done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the hot noontide, and fine carpets prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Mid shrubs, by which the limpid river run.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vivian and Malagigi, that the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might be more tranquil, watched with armour on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When unaccompanied they saw a dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who quickly towards their place of shelter came;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>Hippalca she; from whom was torn away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Frontino, that good horse, by Rodomont:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him had she long pursued the former day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now with prayer, now followed with affront.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which booting nought, she had retraced her way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek Rogero out in Agrismont;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, how I know not, heard upon her round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He here with Richardetto would be found.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And, for to her well known was that repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Used by her often, she herself addrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the fount, and in that quarter fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Found him, and in what manner, was exprest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But like embassadress, who⁠—wise and ware⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better than was enjoined performs a hest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Richardetto she beheld, made show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if she good Rogero did not know.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>She turned her wholly to Sir Richardet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As bound direct to him; and, on his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He who well knew her, straight uprose and met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And asked that damsel whitherward she hied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hippalca, with her eyes yet red and wet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From her long weeping, sighing deeply, cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But cried aloud, that young Rogero, near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior she addrest, her tale might hear:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“I from Mount Alban with a courser sped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So your good sister had commanded me)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A horse much loved by her, and highly bred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Frontino is yclept that charger free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him I more than thirty miles had led</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards Marseilles, where she designed to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within few days; by her enjoined to wend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, and her arrival there attend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“I in the sure belief pursued my course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was none so stout of heart, if I should say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How Sir Rinaldo’s sister owned the horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would presume to take that steed away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But vain was my design; for him parforce</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A Saracen took from me yesterday:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, when to him his master’s name I read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will that bold robber render back the steed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Him I to-day and all the day before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have prayed, and prayer and menace proving vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye cursing him and execrating sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have left at little distance; where, with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both to his courser and himself, the Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As best he can, a combat does maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against a knight, who him so hard has prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I trust my injury shall be redrest.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>At this Rogero, leaping on his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who scarcely had endured the whole to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Richardetto turned; and, as a meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guerdon for his good deed, the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did, with beseechings infinite, entreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To let him singly with that damsel steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until she showed the paynim, who by force</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had wrested from her hands that goodly horse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Richardet (though it seems discourtesy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To yield to other champion that emprize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which by himself should terminated be)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet with Rogero’s earnest suit complies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who takes farewell of that good company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the damsel on her journey hies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leaves those others, whom his feats confound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not merely lost in wonder, but astoud.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>To him Hippalca said, when she apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had drawn him to some distance from the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She was dispatched by her that in her heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bore of his worth the image so imprest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—And added, without using farther art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All that her lady had to him addrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if she told another tale whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Richardetto she was then in fear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>She added how the author of that deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had also said to her with mickle pride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Because I know Rogero owns the steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More willingly I take him from his guide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he would repossess the courser, read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him what I have no desire to hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am that Rodomont, whose martial worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scatters its splendour through this ample earth.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Listening, the visage of the youthful knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Showed with what rage his heart was in a flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well as that the horse was his delight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well upon account of whence it came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And also that ’twas reft in his despite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sees dishonour will ensue and blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save he from Rodomont redeems the prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with a due revenge that wrong repay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>With him, without repose, the damsel rides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with his foe would bring him front to front;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thither journies where the road divides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one branch cuts the plain, one climbs the mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And either pathway to that valley guides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where she had newly left King Rodomont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mountain track was short, but trod with pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That other longer far, but smooth and plain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Hippalca’s ardour to retrieve the prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And upon Rodomont’s avenge the wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Incites that maid the mountain to assay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which (as said) the journey was less long:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While Mandricardo, Rodomont, and they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of whom I erst made mention in my song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That easier track across the level hold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus encounter not Rogero bold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Until King Agramant shall succoured be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suspended is their quarrel (in what wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You know), and in the champions’ company</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doralice, cause of all their discord, hies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now hear the upshot of this history!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their way directly by that fountain lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside whose margin are in pastime met</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa and Aldigier and Richardet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa had, at her companions’ prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cloathed her in female ornaments and vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those, which by Maganza’s traitour were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Late to Lanfusa, in full trust, addrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, though the appearance of that maid was rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without her corslet, casque and all the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—At their entreaty, these for once laid down⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She deigned to seem a maid and donned the gown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>As soon as Mandricardo saw her face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In trust that, could he win her in affray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would that maid, in recompense and place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Doralice, to Rodomont convey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if Love trafficked in such contracts base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lover could his lady change away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet with reason at the event be pained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he in losing one another gained.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Hence with a damsel to provide the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he himself the other may retain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming her worthy any cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would by force of arms the maid obtain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as if he could suddenly hold dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This maid as that, on him bestow the gain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all of those, whom he about her spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith to joust and single fight defied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Vivian and Malagigi (who were dight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In arms, as guard and surety for the rest,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One and the other champion⁠—prompt for fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rose lightly from the herbage which they prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming they had to joust with either knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Rodomont, who came not on this quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No motion made as he a course would run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that they had to tourney but with one.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Sir Vivian is the first who moves his horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With mighty heart, and lays his weapon low;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, that Tartar king, renowned for force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With greater puissance meets the coming foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His lance each warrior levels in the course</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he bests trusts to plant the furious blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vainly Sir Vivian’s spear the casque offends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor throws that paynim knight, nor even bends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>That Tartar’s harder weapon makes the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Vivian, at their onset, fly like grass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, tumbling from his saddle on the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extends the champion amid flowers and grass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To run his chance Sir Malagigi, steeled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did to his brother’s succour quickly pass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But (such that warrior’s hurry to be near)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather accompanied, than venged the peer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>The other of those brethren armed before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His cousin, and had backed his courser wight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, having first defied, encountered sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spurring with flowing rein, the stranger knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the tempered helm that pagan wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sounded the blow, an inch below the sight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaven-high the truncheon flew, in fragments broke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the stout pagan winced not for the stroke.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Him on the left side smote that paynim peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (for the blow was with huge force designed)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Little his shield, and less his iron gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Availed, which opened like the yielding rhind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The weapon pierced his shoulder; Aldigier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now right now left upon his horse inclined;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then him, ‘mid grass and flowers, his comrades view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With arms of crimson, face of pallid, hue.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Next Richardetto comes, and for the blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Intended, levels such a mighty lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He showed himself, as he was wont to show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthy to be a paladin of France;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And has stamped signs of this upon the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he had warred on him with equal chance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But prostrate rolled, encumbered by his steed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor fell the courser through his lord’s misdeed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When knight appeared not on the other side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who should in joust the paynim king affront,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thought the damsel was his prize, and hied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, where she was seated by the fount.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And⁠—“Lady, you are mine,” the Tartar cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Save other champion in your succour mount;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can you make denial or excuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since such the right of war and common use.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa raised her face with haughty cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And answered him: “Thy judgment wanders far;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will concede thy sentence would be clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Concluding I am thine by right of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If either were my lord or cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those, by thee unhorsed in bloody jar:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor theirs am I, nor other’s, but my own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who wins me, wins me from myself alone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“I too with lance and sword do doughty deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more than one good knight on earth have laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Give me,” she cried, “my armour and my steed.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And readily her squires that hest obeyed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then in her waistcoat stood, of flowing weed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Despoiled, with well-knit from and charms displayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in all points (such strength she shewed and grace)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resembled heavenly Mars, except her face.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The damsel donned her sword, when armed all o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on her courser leapt with nimble spring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, right and left, she made him, thrice or more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poised on his haunches, turn in narrow ring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, levelling the sturdy lance she bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Defied, and next assailed, the Tartar king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So combating with Peleus’ son, of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Penthesilaea warred on Trojan shore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Like brittle crystal, in that proud career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The weapons at the rest to pieces went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet neither of those warriors, ’twould appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Backwards one inch at their encounter bent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa, who would willingly be clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What of a closer fight would be the event,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For a new combat with the paynim lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wheeled, to attack that warrior with the sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>That Tartar cursed the elements and sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When her he saw remaining in her sell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she, who thought to make his buckler fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cursed heaven as loudly as that infidel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already were their faulchions raised on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which on the enchanted arms like hammers fell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enchanted arms both combatants enclose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never more needed by those deadly foes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>So perfect are the champions’ plate and chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They thrust or cut of spear or faulchion stay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that the two the battle might maintain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout this and throughout another day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Rodomont leaps in between the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And taxes Mandricardo with delay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crying, “If battle here is to be done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Finish we that which we to-day begun.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“We made a truce, thou knowest, upon pact</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of furnishing our baffled forces aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor foe in joust or fight can be attacked</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By us with justice till this debt be paid.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to Marphisa he in reverent act</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Addressed himself, and of that courier said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next recounted to the martial dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How seeking aid for Agramant he came.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Next prays not only with that Tartar knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She will abandon or defer the fray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that, Troyano’s valiant son to right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She will, together with them, wend her way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which her warlike fame a higher flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More easily may, even to heaven, assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than in a quarrel of such paltry guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which offers hindrance to such fair emprize.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa, who had evermore in thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To prove the paladins of Charles, and who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To France was over land and ocean brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From clime so distant, with no other view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than by her own experience to be taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If their far-spread renown were false or true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved together with the troop to speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as she had heard their monarch’s need.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile Rogero, with that guiding may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had vainly by the rugged pathway sped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who that king Rodomont another way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had taken, when he reached the mountain, read;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thinking, that he was not far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the road straight towards that fountain led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trotting in haste behind the Sarzan hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he new prints upon the path espied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Hippalca he to Mont Albano prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wend, which distant one day’s journey lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because to seek anew that fountain-glade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would be to wander in too wide a guise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that she need not doubt withal, he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that he would retrieve the ravished prize.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, were she in Mount Alban⁠—or where’er⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vowed she the tidings speedily should hear,</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>And gave the letter to that maid to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, writ by him, he in his bosom wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And added many matters, with the prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She would excuse him by her friendly lore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hippalca in her memory fixt, with care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The whole; took leave, and turned her horse once more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ceased that faithful messenger to ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till she Mount Alban reached at evening-tide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero followed fast the paynim knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tracked o’er the level by those footsteps new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But overtook him not, till he got sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside the fount, of Mandricardo too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already either had his promise plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He nought unknown to his compeer would do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till they had succour to that host conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On which King Charles his yoke had nearly laid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>Arrived, Rogero knew Frontino gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, through that courser, knew the knight astride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on his lance with bending shoulder lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in fierce tone the African defied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Job was outdone by Rodomont that day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that the king subdued his haughty pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the fell fight which he had ever used</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek with every instance, he refused.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>The first day this and last, that e’er in fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Rodomont refused his part to bear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But his desire appeared to him so right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In succour of his sovereign to repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That if he had believed he clutched the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faster than nimble leopard gripes the hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He not so far his purpose would forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As on his prey to waste a passing blow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Add, that he knows Rogero is the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who him for good Frontino now assails;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—So famous, that no other cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like him such eminence of glory scales;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—The man, of whom he gladly would be clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By proof, how much in battle he avails:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet shuns the combat, proffered on his part;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So much his monarch’s siege has he at heart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>Three hundred miles, a thousand, would he ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Were it not so⁠—to purchase such affray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he, if him Achilles had defied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had done no otherwise than as I say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So deeply did the covering ashes hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That fire beneath, whose fury stifled lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He told why he refused the strife; and prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well Rogero the design to aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Adding that he, in doing so, would do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What to his lord a faithful vassal owes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still, when the siege was raised, might they renew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And terminate their deadly strife by blows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him Rogero cried, “The fight with you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I freely will defer, till from his foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Agramant be rescued by the sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Provided first Frontino be restored.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Would you that I delay to prove by deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That you have acted in unworthy sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Nor did, like valiant man, to take my steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus from a woman⁠—till we meet at court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Render me my Frontino back, or read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon no other ground, will I support</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That battle shall not be between us two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor will accord an hour of truce to you.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>While of that African he so demands</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Frontino, or him threats with instant fray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And either still the other’s claim withstands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this the steed will grant, nor that delay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Mandricardo stirs, on the other hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another strife; who sees that ensign gay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero on his shield was wont to wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bird which reigns o’er other fowls of air.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>He bore on azure field that eagle white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauteous ensign of the Trojan throng:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such glorious bearing showed that youthful knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he drew his line from Hector strong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Mandricardo knew not of this right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would endure⁠—and deemed a crying wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That any other but himself should wield</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Famed Hector’s argent eagle on his shield.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>King Mandricardo is like blazon wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bird of Ide, which bore off Ganymede:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How in the castle perilous of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He gained that noble ensign for his meed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—That enterprize I ween, with matter more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You bear in mind, and how, for his good deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fairy gave it him with all the gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erst given by Vulcan to the Trojan peer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>The Tartar and Rogero had before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Engaged in battle, only on this quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Divided by what accident, my lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Recites not, as already manifest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor had till now those knights encountered more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Mandricardo sees that bird imprest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the Child’s shield, he shouts with threatening cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To young Rogero: “Take my proud defy!”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Audacious man, mine ensign do’st thou wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this to-day for the first time, is said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And think’st thou, madman, I will thee forbear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because for once to spare thee I was led?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But since nor menace nor yet counsel are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of force to drive this folly from thy head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It shall appear how much it had been best</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thee forthwith to have obeyed my hest.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“As fire, whereon dry, heated wood is strown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roused by a little puff, at once ascends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So burns Rogero’s wrath, to fury blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the first word with which that king offends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Thou thinkest,” he exclaims, “to bear me down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because his knight as well with me contends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But learn that I can win in fighting field</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From him the horse, from thee good Hector’s shield.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Yet once before⁠—nor is it long ago⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Twixt us in battle was this question tried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I that day restrained the murderous blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because thou hadst no faulchion at thy side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These shall be deeds, that strife was but a show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ill this argent bird shall thee betide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This is the ancient bearing of my line;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tis thou usurpest what by right is mine.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>—“Say rather, thou usurpest mine from me”;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cried Mandricardo; and that faulchion drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which lately, underneath the greenwood tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando from his hand in fury threw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Child, who could not aught but courteous be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Such was his gentle nature) at the view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Mandricardo, with his faulchion drawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let fall his ready lance upon the lawn;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And at the same time, strained his goodly sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And better braced the covering shield he wore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But ’twixt those combatants leapt Argier’s lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And quick Marphisa spurred the pair before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one this foe, the other that implored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And both besought, that they would strive no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Rodomont complains the Tartar knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has violated twice the compact plight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVII-->
			<p>
				<span>First, in belief he should Marphisa gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He more than once had jousted for that fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now to bear off Rogero’s ensign fain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He for king Agramant shows little care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“If thus” (said Rodomont) “you faith maintain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To finish our own combat better were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cause of strife more fitting and more due</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than either of the pleas maintained by you.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“On this condition was the treaty plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the accord between us now in force;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When I with thee shall have performed the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I next shall answer him about the horse:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You then with him, if you survive, your right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall to the shield maintain in warlike course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I such work shall give you, I conceive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As will small labour for Rogero leave.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIX-->
			<p>
				<span>—“The bargain which thou hopest thou shalt not have,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(King Mandricardo answered Rodomont)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I will accord thee more than thou do’st crave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And trust to make thee sweat from feet to front.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to bestow on others, much shall save,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As water never fails in plenteous font;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for Rogero and a thousand more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the world beside reserve a store.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CX-->
			<p>
				<span>Their fury waxed, and angrier words ensued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now upon this and now upon that side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Rodomont and with the Child at feud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fierce Mandricardo both at once defied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, not endowed with suffering mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would hear no more of peace, but vengeance cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now here Marphisa hurried, and now there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But could not singly such an ill repair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXI-->
			<p>
				<span>As peasant, when a river saps its mounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seeking vent the oozing waters drop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hastening to shut the stream within its bounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And save his pastures and expected crop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dams right and left; yet him the stream confounds:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, if he here the sinking ruin prop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There he beholds the rotten dyke give out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from thick seams the restless water spout,</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXII-->
			<p>
				<span>So, while the Tartar and Rogero rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Rodomont, in hurly-burly fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For each of these would fiercest battle wage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would outgo his fears in that assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa seeks their fury to assuage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And strives, and time and trouble throws away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For as she makes one knight from strife retire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She sees the others re-engage with ire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa, to appease the warriors bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaimed, “Sirs, listen to my better lore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A good remembrance ’tis, all argument</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To leave until we Agramant restore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If each is on his own design intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Mandricardo will I strive once more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fain would see, according to his word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he can conquer me with spear and sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“But if, to aid our sovereign, duty call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him let us aid, nor civil discord breed.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“To ground, through me, such project shall not fall,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero said, “so he restore my steed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let him resign that horse, or⁠—once for all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say again⁠—to his defence take heed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I either here my parting breath will yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or on my courser will return afield.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXV-->
			<p>
				<span>—“Twere not so easy to obtain this quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As ’twere that other,” Rodomont replied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus pursued: “I unto thee protest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If any evil shall our king betide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thine is the fault not mine; for I am prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To do whate’er is fitting, on my side.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Small heed to that protest Rogero paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stung by fury, griped his trenchant blade.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>On Argier’s king he sprang, like savage boar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encountering him with shoulder and with shield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him disordered and distrest so sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That with one stirrup’s loss, the monarch reeled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Rogero,” Mandricardo cried, “give o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or else with me divide the battle-field”;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And struck, this said, with worse than felon spite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the morion of that youthful knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Even to his courser’s neck Rogero bends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, when he would, himself can rear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because the sword of Ulien’s son descends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well upon the youthful cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, but that adamant his face defends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Across the cheeks his tempered helm would sheer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Child, in anguish, opens either hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this the bridle drops and that the brand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Him o’er the field his courser bears away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On earth the faulchion lies, which he let go:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa (with Rogero’s through that day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Comrade in arms) appeared like fire to glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enraged, that two one knight should overlay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as magnanimous and stout, for foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Singled King Mandricardo out, and sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all her might, stroke upon his head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Rodomont o’er the plain pursues his man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Another stroke, and he has lost the horse!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Richardetto drives, and Vivian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between the Child and paynim in that course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This warrior at the king of Argier ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from Rogero severed him by force;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That (it was Vivian) in Rogero’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now from the blow recovered, placed his brand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXX-->
			<p>
				<span>As soon as to himself the Child returns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And is by Vivian armed with sword again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To venge the injury that stripling burns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And runs at Rodomont with flowing rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like lion, whom a bull upon his horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has lifted, though he feels this while no pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So him his heat of blood, disdain, and ire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To venge that cruel outrage goad and fire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero storms upon the paynim’s crest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, could that knight recover his own brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which by foul felony (as erst exprest)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was ravished from the youthful warrior’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I well believe that the descending pest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont’s iron casque will ill withstand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That casque which Babel’s king bade forge, who sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To war on Heaven in his presumptuous thought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Discord, believing nothing could ensue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But stir, and strife, and combat on that head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that there was no place, amid the crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For truce or treaty, to her sister said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she, her well-beloved monks to view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might now again with her securely tread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let them depart; and mark we where in front</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero has sore wounded Rodomont.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero’s blow was levelled with such spite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That this upon Frontino’s crupper made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The helmet and the shell of iron smite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In which that Saracen his limbs arrayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, three times or four, to left and right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—As if about to fall⁠—head-foremost, swayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would have lost withal his trusty brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that the hilt was fastened to his hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa has king Mandricardo prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile, and makes him sweat breast, front, and face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he Marphisa has as sore distrest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But such good plates each valiant bosom case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impassable is either iron vest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And both have hitherto maintained their place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, at a turn her martial courser made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa needed young Rogero’s aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa’s martial steed, in turning short,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where a firm footing that soft mead denied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the moist surface slipt, and in such sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he fell, helpless, on his better side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as he rose in haste and lacked support,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Athwart by furious Brigliador was plied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On which the paynim, little courteous, came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that he fell anew beneath the dame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero, when Marphisa on the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He saw unhorsed, deferred no more his aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for that deed had leisure; since, astound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont far away had been conveyed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He smote the morion which that Tartar crowned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, cleft like stalk, his head on earth had laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had he his trusty Balisarda born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Mandricardo other helmet worn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rodomont, of his senses repossest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turned round this while, and Richardetto spied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And recollecting how, when late distrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to Rogero succour had supplied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quickly against that youthful warrior prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who an ill guerdon would from him abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did Malagigi not his malice thwart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With other magic and with mickle art.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Sage Malagigi versed in every sleight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which by the wisest wizard can be done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although his book he has not, by whose might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He in his course can stop the passing sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The conjuration recollects and rite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which he tames the rebel fiends; and one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bids enter into Doralice’s steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he to fury stings and headlong speed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Into that gentle palfrey’s form, who bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauteous daughter of King Stordilane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Vivian’s brother, simply by his lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made pass an angel of the dark domain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the good horse, who never moved before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Except in due obedience to the rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now took a leap, possest by that ill sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thirty feet long and sixteen feet in height.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>It was a mighty leap, yet not so wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to make any rider void the sell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing herself so high in air, loud cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Yielding herself for dead) that bonnibel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her palfrey, with the Daemon for his guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After his leap, runs, goaded by the spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(The maid still screaming) such a furious course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An arrow had not reached the flying horse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>At the first hearing of that voice, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Ulien, on his part, the strife suspended;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thither, where the furious palfrey run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swiftly in succour of the lady wended.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less was by the Tartar monarch done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who neither Child nor damsel more offended;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But without craving time, or truce, or peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursued King Rodomont and Doralice.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa rose meanwhile, to fury stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with disdain all over in a glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thought to accomplish her revenge, and erred:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For at too great a distance was the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, who beheld the war deferred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather like lion roared than sighed: well know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those two their coursers they should vainly gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Following Frontino and good Brigliador.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero will not halt till he renew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And end the unfinished combat for the horse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa will not quit that Tartar, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will to her satisfaction prove his force.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To leave their quarrel in such guise the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteem foul scandal; as their better course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In chase of those offending knights to fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is the conclusion of that valiant pair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>They in the paynim camp will find each foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If them before they find not on their way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom thither bound, to raise the siege they know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere Charlemagne bring all beneath his sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So thitherward the twain directly go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where these, they deem, will be their certain prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet not so rudely thence Rogero broke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that he first with his companion spoke.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Thither returns Rogero, where apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is he, the brother of his lady fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vows himself his friend, with generous heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In good or evil fortune, everywhere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him he implores⁠—and frames his speech with art⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He his salutes will to his sister bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this so well, he moves by that request</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No doubt in him, nor any of the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Of Malagigi he and Viviane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next takes farewell and wounded Aldigier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their services no less that kindly twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proffer, as ever debtors to the peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa to seek Paris is so fain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That parting she forgets her friends to cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Malagigi and Vivian, in pursuit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Follow, and from afar that maid salute;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And so Sir Richardet as well: but low</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On earth lies Aldigier, and there must rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The two first champions towards Paris go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the two others next pursue that quest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In other canto, Sir, I hope to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of wondrous and of superhuman gest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wrought to the damage of the Christian king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By those two couples of whose worth I sing.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
