<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-36" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>While with the fierce Marphisa at despite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Duke Aymon’s daughter wages fierce affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One and the other host engage in fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Bradamant Rogero wends his way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With other war disturbs their great delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marphisa bold; but when that martial may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has for her brother recognized the peer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They end their every strife with joyous cheer.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Where’er they be, all hearts of gentle strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still cannot choose but courtesy pursue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For they from nature and from habit gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What they henceforth can never more undo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alike the heart that is of churlish vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where’er it be, its evil kind will shew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nature inclines to ill, through all her range,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And use is second nature, hard to change.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Among the warriors of antiquity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much gentleness and courtesy appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Virtues but seldom seen with us; while we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of evil ways, on all sides, see and hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hippolytus, when you, with ensignry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Won from the foe, and with his captive gear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Adorned our temples; and his galleys bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laden with prey, to your paternal shore;</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>All the inhuman deeds which wrought by hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Moor, or Turk, or Tartar ever were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Yet not by the Venetians’ ill command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That evermore the praise of justice bear,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were practised by that foul and evil band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of soldiers, who their mercenaries are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those so many fires not now I tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which on our farms and pleasant places fell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>Though a foul vengeance in that blow was meant</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mainly at you, who being at Caesar’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Padua by his leaguering host was pent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas known, that oft, through you, was turned aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than one ravening flame, and oft was spent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fire, in fane and village blazing wide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time the destined mischief ye withstood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to your inborn courtesy seemed good.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>This will I pass, nor their so many more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discourteous and despiteous doings tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save one alone, whereat from rock-stone hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whene’er the tale is told warm tears might well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That day you sent your family before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, my lord, where, under omens fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your foes into a well protected seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abandoning their barks, had made retreat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>As Hector and Aeneas, mid the flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fire to the banded fleet of Greece applied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I Hercules and Alexander viewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Urged by too sovereign ardour, side by side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spurring before all others in their mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even within the hostile ramparts ride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prick so far, the second ‘scaped with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the foremost closed the opposing train.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>Feruffine ‘scaped, the good Cantelmo left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What counsel, Sora’s duke, was thine, what heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When thy bold son thou saw’st, of helm bereft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid a thousand swords, when⁠—dragged apart⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou saw’st his young head from his shoulders cleft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A shipboard, on a plank? I, on my part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marvel, that seeing but the murder done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slew thee not, as the faulchion slew thy son.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Cruel Sclavonian! say, whence hast thou brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy ways of warfare? By what Scythian rite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To slay the helpless prisoner is it taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who yields his arms, nor fends himself in fight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was it a crime he for his country fought?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill upon thee the sun bestows his light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remorseless aera, which hast filled the page</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Atreus’, Tantalus’, Thyestes’ rage!</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>Barbarian! thou madest shorter by the head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The boldest of his age, on whom did beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sun ’twixt pole and pole, ’twixt Indus’ bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where he sinks in Ocean’s western stream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose years and beauty might have pity bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Anthropophagus, in Polypheme;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not thee; that art in wickedness outdone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By any Cyclops, any Lestrigon.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>I ween, mid warriors in the days of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No such example was; they all, in field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were full of gentleness and courteous lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor against conquered foe their bosom steeled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only gentle Bradamant forbore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To harm the knights whom, smitten on the shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her lance unhorsed; but for the vanquished crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Detained their steeds, that they might mount anew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>I of that lady fair, of mickle might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Told you above, how she had overthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Serpentine of the Star in single fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grandonio and Ferrau, and then upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their coursers had replaced each baffled knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I told moreover how the third was gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero to defy to the career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon her call, who seemed a cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero heard the call in joyous vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bade his arms be brought; now while in view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Agramant he donned the plate and chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those lords the former question moved anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was the knight, that on the martial plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The manage of the lance so quaintly knew?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of Ferrau, who spake with him whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Craved, if to him was known that cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Be ye assured,” to them Ferrau replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“He is not one of those I hear you cite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To me (for I his open face descried).</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo’s youthful brother seemed the knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But since his doughty valour I have tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wot not such is Richardetto’s might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I ween it is his sister, who, I hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resembles much in mien that martial peer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“The damsel equals well, so Rumour tells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, and every paladin in fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But brother she and cousin both excels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Measured by that which I have seen to-day.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hearing him, while upon her praise he dwells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the sky reddens with the morning ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero’s face is flushed with crimson hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his heart throbs, nor knows he what to do.</span>
			</p>
			<p>XV Stung, at these tidings, by the amorous dart⁠—Within, new fire inflames the cavalier; And strait, together with the burning smart, Shoots through his bones a chill, produced by fear; Fear, that new wrath had stifled in her heart That mighty love, wherewith she burned whilere. Confused he stands, irresolute and slow, And undecided if to stay or go.</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Now fierce Marphisa, who was there, and prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By huge desire to meet the stranger wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And armed withal (for, save in iron vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her seldom would you find by day or night).</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hearing Rogero is in armour drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fearing to lose the honour of the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If first that champion with the stranger vies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thinks to prevent the youth and win the prize.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>She leapt upon her horse, and thither hied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Aymon’s daughter on the listed plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With palpitating heart, upon her side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waited Rogero; whom the damsel fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would make her prisoner, and but schemed to guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her lance in mode the stripling least to pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa from the city portal fares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on her gallant helm a phoenix wears.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Whether the maid would publish, in her pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she was single in the world, for might;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or whether by that symbol signified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she would live, exempt from bridal rite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her closely Aymon’s martial daughter eyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When seeing not those features, her delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She craves the damsel’s name before they move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hears that it is she who joys her love:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Or rather she, that gentle lady thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had joyed her love; and whom she hated so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her to Death’s door her anger would have brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless she venged her sorrow on the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She wheeled her courser round, with fury fraught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less with desire to lay her rival low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than with the lance to pierce her in mid breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And put her every jealousy at rest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>Parforce to ground must go the royal maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To prove it hard or soft the listed plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be with such unwonted scorn appaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she is nearly maddened by disdain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarce was she thrown, before her trenchant blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She bared, and hurried to avenge the stain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cried Aymon’s daughter, no less proud of heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“What art thou doing? Thou my prisoner art.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Though I have courtesy for others, none”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(She said) “from me, Marphisa, shalt thou find.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since evermore I hear of thee, as one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To pride and every churlishness inclined.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa, at these words, was heard to groan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As roars in some sea-rock the prisoned wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She screamed an answer; but its sense was drowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Such rage confused that damsel) in the sound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>She whirls this while her faulchion, and would fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wound horse or rider in the paunch or breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Aymon’s watchful daughter turns the rein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on one side her courser leaps; possest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With furious anger and with fierce disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She at her opposite her lance addrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hardly touched the damsel, ere, astound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa fell, reversed upon the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Scarce down, Marphisa started from the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Intent fell mischief with her sword to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant couched her golden spear again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet again the damsel overthrew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet Bradamant, though blest with might and main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was not so much the stronger of the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to have flung the maid in every just,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that such power was in the lance’s thrust.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>This while some knights (some knights upon our side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say) forth issuing from the city, go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the field of strife, which did divide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The squadrons, here and there, of either foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Not half a league of one another wide⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing their knight such mighty prowess show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their knight, but whom no otherwise they knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than as a warrior of the Christian crew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Troyano’s generous son, who had espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This band approaching to the city-wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For due defence would every means provide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every peril, every case forestall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And orders many to take arms, who ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forth from the ramparts, at the monarch’s call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With them Rogero goes, in armour cased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Balked of the battle by Marphisa’s haste.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The enamoured youth, with beating heart, intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood by, the issue of the just to view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For his dear cousin fearing the event,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that he well Marphisa’s valour knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—At the beginning I would say⁠—when, bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On mischief, fiercely closed the furious two:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when that duel’s turn the stripling eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He stands amazed and stupid with surprize;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And when he saw unfinished was the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the first onset, like the justs whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Misdoubting some strange accident, in sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore vexed, this while remained the cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To either maid wished well that youthful knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For both were loved, but not alike were dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this the stripling’s love was fury, fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that ’twas rather fondness than desire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>If so Rogero could with honour do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He willingly the warriors would divide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But his companions, in the fear to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Victory with King Charles’s knight abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteeming him the better of the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Break in between and turn their arms aside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the other part, the Christian foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Advance, and both divisions come to blows.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>On this side and that other, rings the alarm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which in those camps is sounded every day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bidding the unmounted mount, the unarmed arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all their standards seek, without delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, under separate flags, the squadrons swarm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than one shrilling trump is heard to bray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as their rattling notes the riders call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rousing the foot, beat drum and ataball.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>As fierce as thought could think, ’twixt either host</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kindled the fell and sanguinary fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The daring damsel, fair Dordona’s boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore vexed and troubled, that in the affray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She cannot compass what she covets most,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Marphisa with avenging steel to slay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now here, not there, amid the medley flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping to see the youth for whom she sighs.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>By the eagle argent on the shield of blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She recognized Rogero, mid the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With eyes and thought intent, she stops to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior’s manly shoulders and his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair face and movements full of graceful shew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then the maid, with mickle spite possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thinking another joys the stripling’s love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus speaks, as sovereign rage and fury move.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Shall then another kiss those lips so bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sweet, if those fair lips are lost to me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah! never other shall in thee delight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For it not mine, no other’s shalt thou be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than die alone and of despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I with this hand will slay myself and thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That if I lose thee here, at least in hell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With thee I to eternity may dwell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“If thou slay’st me, there is good reason, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The comfort too of vengeance should obtain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that all edicts and all equity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The death of him that causes death ordain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, since you justly, I unjustly, die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deem I that thine is equal to my pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I him who seeks my life, alas! shall spill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou her that loves and worships thee wouldst kill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“My hand, why hast thou not the hardiment</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rive with steel the bosom of my foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That me so many times to death has shent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under the faith of love, in peaceful show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, who to take my life can now consent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor even have pity of my cruel woe?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dare, valiant heart, this impious man to slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let his death my thousand deaths appay!”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>So said, she spurred at him amid the throng;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, first⁠—“Defend thee, false Rogero!”⁠—cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“No more, if I have power, in spoil and wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Done to a virgin heart, shalt thou take pride.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hearing that voice the hostile ranks among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He deems⁠—and truly deems⁠—he hears his bride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose voice the youth remembers in such wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That mid a thousand would he recognize.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Her further meaning well did he divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weening that him she in that speech would blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For having broke their pact; and⁠—with design,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The occasion of his failure to proclaim⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his desire for parley made a sign:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But she, with vizor closed, already came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raging and grieved, intent, with vengeful hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fling the youth; nor haply upon sand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero, when he saw her so offended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fixed himself firmly in his arms and seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He rests his lance, but holds the stave suspended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that it shall not harm her when they meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She that to smite and pierce the Child intended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pitiless, and inflamed with furious heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has not the courage, when she sees him near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fling, or do him outrage with the spear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Void of effect, ’tis thus their lances go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And it is well; since Love with burning dart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tilting this while at one and the other foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has lanced the enamoured warriors in mid-heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unable at the Child to aim her blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady spent her rage in other part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mighty deeds achieved, which fame will earn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While overhead the circling heavens shall turn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Above three hundred men in that affray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In little space by her dismounted lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone that warlike damsel wins the day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From her alone the Moorish people fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her Rogero, circling, threads his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And says: “Unless I speak with you I die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hear me, for love of heaven!⁠—what done I done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! that ever mine approach ye shun?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>As when soft southern breezes are unpent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which with a tepid breath from seaward blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The snows dissolve, and torrents find a vent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ice, so hard erewhile, is seen to flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At those entreaties, at that brief lament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo’s sister’s heart is softened so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith compassionate and pious grown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which anger fain had made more hard than stone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>Would she not, could she not, she nought replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But spurred aslant the ready Rabicane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, signing to Rogero, rode as wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As she could wend from that embattled train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to a sheltered valley turned aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein embosomed was a little plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the mid lawn a wood of cypress grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose saplings of one stamp appeared to view.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>Within that thicket, of white marble wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is a proud monument, and newly made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he that makes enquiry, here is taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In few brief verses who therein is laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But of those lines, methinks, took little thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair Bradamant, arriving in that glade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero spurred his courser, and pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And overtook that damsel in the wood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But turn we to Marphisa, that anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">During this space was seated on her steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sought again the valiant champion, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the first onset cast her on the mead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw, how from the mingling host withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, after that strange knight to speed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor deemed the youth pursued in love; she thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He but to end their strife and quarrel sought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>She pricks her horse behind the two, and gains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well nigh as soon as they, that valley; how</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her coming thither either lover pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who lives and loves, untaught by me, may know:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But sorest vext sad Bradamant remains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beholding her whence all her sorrows flow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who shall persuade the damsel but that love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For young Rogero brings her to that grove?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>And him perfidious she anew did name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Perfidious, was it not enough (she said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I should know thy perfidy from fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But must the witness of thy guilt be made?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I wot, to drive me from thee is thine aim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I, that thy desires may be appaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will die; but strive, in yielding up my breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She too shall die, the occasion of my death.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Angrier than venomed viper, with a bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So saying, she upon Marphisa flies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And plants so well the spear, that she, astound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell backward on the champaigne in such guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nigh half her helm was buried in the ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor was the damsel taken by surprise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay, did her best the encounter to withstand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet with her helmed head she smote the sand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Bradamant who will die, or in that just</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will put to death Marphisa, rages so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She has no mind again with lance to thrust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again that martial maid to overthrow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But thinks her head to sever from the bust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where it half buried lies, with murderous blow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Away the enchanted lance that damsel flings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unsheathes the sword, and from her courser springs.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But is too slow withal; for on her feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She finds Marphisa, with such fierce disdain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflamed, at being in that second heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So easily reversed upon the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She hears in vain exclaim, in vain entreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, who beholds their strife with pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So blinded are the pair with spite and rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they with desperate fury battle wage.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>At half-sword’s engage the struggling foes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And⁠—such their stubborn mood⁠—with shortened brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They still approach, and now so fiercely close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They cannot choose but grapple, hand to hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her sword, no longer needful, each foregoes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And either now new means of mischief planned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero both implores with earnest suit:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But supplicates the twain with little fruit.</span>
			</p>
			<p>L When he entreaties unavailing found, The youth prepared by force to part the two; Their poniards snatched away, and on the ground, Beneath a cypress-tree, the daggers threw. When they no weapons have wherewith to wound, With prayer and threat, he interferes anew: But vainly; for, since better weapons lack, Each other they with fists and feet attack.</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero ceased not from his task; he caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By hand or arm, the fiercely struggling pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till to the utmost pitch of fury wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fell Marphisa’s angry passions were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, that this ample world esteemed at nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the Child’s friendship had no further care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plucked from the foe, she ran to seize her sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fastened next upon that youthful lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Like a discourteous man and churl ye do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, to disturb another’s fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A deed (she cried) this hand shall make ye rue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which I intend, shall vanquished both.” The knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sought fierce Marphisa’s fury to subdue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With gentle speech; but full of such despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He found her, and inflamed with such disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All parley was a waste of time and pain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>At last his faulchion young Rogero drew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ire as well had flushed that cavalier:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor is it my belief, that ever shew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Athens or Rome, or city whatsoe’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Witnessed, which ever so rejoiced the view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As this rejoices, as this sight is dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Bradamant, when, through their strife displaced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Every suspicion from her breast is chased.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Bradamant took her sword, and to descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The duel of those champions stood apart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The god of war, descended from the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She deemed Rogero, for his strength and art:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he seemed Mars, Marphisa to the eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seemed an infernal Fury, on her part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis true, that for a while the youthful knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against that damsel put not forth his might.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>He knew the virtues of that weapon well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such proof thereof the knight erewhile had made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where’er it falls parforce is every spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Annulled, or by its stronger virtue stayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence so Rogero smote, it never fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon its edge or point, but still the blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descended flat: he long this rule observes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet once he from his patient purpose swerves.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>In that, a mighty stroke Marphisa sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meaning to cleave the brainpan of her foe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He raised the buckler to defend his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the sword smote upon its bird of snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor broke nor bruised the shield, by spell bested;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But his arm rang astounded by the blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor aught but Hector’s mail the sword had stopt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose furious blow would his left arm have lopt;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And had upon his head descended shear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereat designed to strike the savage fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarce his left arm can good Rogero rear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can scarce the shield and blazoned bird upbear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All pity he casts off, and ’twould appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As in his eyes a lighted torch did glare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As hard as he can smite, he smites; and woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To thee, Marphisa, if he plants the blow!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>I cannot tell you truly in what wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That faulchion swerves against a cypress-stock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In such close-serried ranks the saplings rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Buried above a palm within the block.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As this the mountain and the plain that lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath it, with a furious earthquake rock;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from that marble monument proceeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A voice, that every mortal voice exceeds.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The horrid voice exclaims, “Your quarrel leave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ’twere a deed unjust and inhumane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That brother should of life his sister reave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or sister by her brother’s hand be slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero and Marphisa mine, believe!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tale which I deliver is not vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seed of one father, on one womb ye lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And first together saw the light of day.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Galaciella’s children are ye, whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She to Rogero, hight the second, bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose brothers, having, by unrighteous doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of your unhappy sire deprived that fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not heeding that she carried in her womb</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye, who yet suckers of their lineage are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her in a rotten carcase of a boat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To founder in mid ocean, set afloat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“But Fortune, that had destined you whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet unborn, to many a fair emprize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your mother to that lonely shore did steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which overright the sandy Syrtes lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, having given you birth, that spirit dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith ascended into Paradise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A witness of the piteous case was I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So Heaven had willed, and such your destiny!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“I to the dame as descent burial gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As could be given upon that desert sand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye, well enveloped in my vest, I save,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bear to Mount Carena from the strand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make a lioness leave whelps and cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And issue from the wood, with semblance bland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye, twice ten months, with mickle fondness bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from her paps the milky mother fed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Needing to quit my home upon a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And journey through the country, (as you can</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply remember ye) we are on our way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were overtaken by an Arab clan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those robbers thee, Marphisa, bore away:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While young Rogero ‘scaped, who better ran.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bereaved of thee, they woful loss I wept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with more watchful care thy brother kept.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Rogero, if Atlantes watched thee well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While yet he was alive, thou best dost know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I the fixed stars had heard of thee foretell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou shouldst perish by a treacherous foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Christian land; and still their influence fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was ended, laboured to avert the blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor having power in fine thy will to guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I sickened sore, and of my sorrow died.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“But here, before my death, for in this glade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I knew thou should’st with bold Marphisa fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I with huge stones, amassed by hellish aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had this fair monument of marble dight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I to Charon with loud outcries said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I would not he should hence convey my sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till here, prepared in deadly fray to strive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero and his sister should arrive.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Thus has my spirit for this many a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waited thy coming in these beauteous groves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So be no more to jealous fears a prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O Bradamant, because Rogero loves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But me to quit the cheerful realms of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seek the darksome cloisters it behoves.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here ceased the voice; which in the Child amazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those two damsels mighty marvel raised.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Gladly a sister in the martial queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, she in him a brother knows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who now embrace, nor move her jealous spleen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That with the love of young Rogero glows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And citing what, and when, and where had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their childish deeds, as they to memory rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In summing up past times, more sure they hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The things whereof the wizard’s spirit told.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero from Marphisa does not hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How Bradamant to him at heart is dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by what obligations he is tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In moving words relates the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ceases till he has, on either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turned to firm love the hate they bore whilere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, as a sign of peace, and discord chased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They, at his bidding, tenderly embraced.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa to Rogero makes request</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To say what sire was theirs, and what their strain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how he died; by banded foes opprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or at close barriers, was the warrior slain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who it was had issued the behest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To drown their mother in the stormy main?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For of the tale, if ever heard before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Little or nothing she in memory bore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Of Trojan ancestors are we the seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through famous Hector’s line,” (Rogero said,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“For after young Astyanax was freed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From fierce Ulysses and the toils he spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving another stripling in his stead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his own age, he out of Phrygia fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, after long and wide sea-wandering, gained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sicily’s shore, and in Messina reigned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Part of Calabria within Faro held</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior’s heirs, who after a long run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of successors, departed thence and dwelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Mars’ imperial city: more than one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Famed king and emperor, who that list have swelled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Rome and other part has filled the throne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from Constantius and good Constantine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stretched to the son of Pepin, is their line.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Rogero, Gambaron, Buovo hence succeed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that Rogero, second of the name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who filled our fruitful mother with his seed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As thou Atlantes may’st have heard proclaim.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of our fair lineage many a noble deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shalt thou hear blazed abroad by sounding Fame.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Agolant’s inroad next the stripling told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Agramant and with Almontes bold;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And how a lovely daughter, who excelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In feats of arms, that king accompanied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So stout she many paladins had quelled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how, in fine, she for Rogero sighed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for his love against her sire rebelled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was baptized, and was Rogero’s bride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how a traitor loved (him Bertram name)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His brother’s wife with an incestuous flame;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And country, sire, and brethren two betrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping he so the lady should have won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How Risa open to the foe he laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom all scathe was on those kinsmen done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How Agolant’s two furious sons conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their mother, great with child, and six months gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aboard a helmless boat, and with its charge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In wildest winter, turned adrift the barge.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Valiant Marphisa, with a tranquil face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heard young Rogero thus his tale pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And joyed to be descended of a race</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from so fair a font its waters drew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence Clermont, whence renowned Mongrana trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their noble line, the martial damsel knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blazoned through years and centuries by Fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unrivalled, both, in arms of mighty name.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>When afterwards she from her brother knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agramant’s uncle, sire, and grandsire fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In treacherous wise, the first Rogero slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And brought to cruel pass Galacielle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa could not hear the story through:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him she cries, “With pardon, what you tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brother, convicts you of too foul a wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In leaving thus our sire unvenged so long.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Could’st thou not in Almontes and Troyane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As dead whilere, your thirsty faulchion plant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By you those monarch’s children might be slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are you alive, and lives King Agramant?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never will you efface the shameful stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ye, so often wronged, not only grant</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Life to that king, but as your lord obey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lodge in his court, and serve him for his pay?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Here heartily in face of Heaven I vow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Christ my father worshipped, to adore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And till I venge my parents on the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wear this armour, and I will deplore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your deed, Rogero, and deplore even now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That you should swell the squadrons of the Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or other follower of the Moslem faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save sword in hand, and to the paynim’s scathe.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Ah! how fair Bradamant uplifts again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her visage at that speech, rejoiced in sprite!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero she exhorts in earnest vein</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To do as his Marphisa counsels right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bids him seek the camp of Charlemagne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And have himself acknowledged in his sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who so reveres and lauds his father’s worth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He even deems him one unmatched on earth.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>In the beginning so he should have done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Warily young Rogero answer made,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, for the tale was not so fully known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As since, the deed had been too long delaid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, seeing it was fierce Troyano’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That had begirt him with the knightly blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, as a traitor, well might be abhorred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he slew one, accepted as his lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>But, as to Bradamant whilere, he cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will all measures and all means assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereby some fair occasion may arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To leave the king; and had there been delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he whilere had done in otherwise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She on the Tartar king the fault must lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How sorely handled that redoubted foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had left him in their battle, she must know;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>And she, that every day had sought his bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must of this truth the fittest witness be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much upon this was answered, much was said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between those damsels, who at last agree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as their last resolve, last counsel read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He should rejoin the paynim’s ensignry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he found fair occasion to resort</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Agramant’s to Charles’s royal court.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>To Bradamant the bold Marphisa cries:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Let him begone, nor doubt am I, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many days pass, will manage in such wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Agramant shall be his lord no more.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So says the martial damsel, nor implies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The secret purpose which she has in store.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Making his congees to the friendly twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To join his king Rogero turns the rein.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>When a complaint is heard from valley near:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All now stand listening, to the noise attent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to that plaintive voice incline their ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A woman’s (as ’twould seem) that makes lament.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I this strain would gladly finish here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, that I finish it, be ye content:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For better things I promise to report,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If ye to hear another strain resort.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
