<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-20" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>CANTO 20</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Guido and his from that foul haunt retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While all Astolpho chases with his horn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who to all quarters of the town sets fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then roving singly round the world is borne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marphisa, for Gabrina's cause, in ire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Puts upon young Zerbino scathe and scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes him guardian of Gabrina fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom he first learns news of Isabel.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Great fears the women of antiquity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In arms and hallowed arts as well have done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of their worthy works the memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lustre through this ample world has shone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Praised is Camilla, with Harpalice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the fair course which they in battle run.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Corinna and Sappho, famous for their lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shine two illustrious light, to set no more.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Women have reached the pinnacle of glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In every art by them professed, well seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whosoever turns the leaf of story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Finds record of them, neither dim nor mean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The evil influence will be transitory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If long deprived of such the world had been;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And envious men, and those that never knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their worth, have haply hid their honours due.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>To me it plainly seems, in this our age</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of women such is the celebrity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it may furnish matter to the page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence this dispersed to future years shall be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And you, ye evil tongues which foully rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be tied to your eternal infamy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And women's praises so resplendent show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They shall, by much, Marphisa's worth outgo.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>To her returning yet again; the dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him who showed to her such courteous lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Refused not to disclose her martial name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since he agreed to tell the style be bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She quickly satisfied the warrior's claim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To learn his title she desired so sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"I am Marphisa," the virago cried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All else was known, as bruited far and wide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>The other, since 'twas his to speak, begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With longer preamble: "Amid your train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sirs, it is my belief that there is none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But has heard mention of my race and strain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not Pontus, Aethiopia, Ind alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all their neighbouring realms, but France and Spain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wot well of Clermont, from whose loins the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Issued who killed Almontes bold in fight,</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>"And Chiareillo and Mambrino slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sacked the realm whose royal crown they wore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come of this blood, where Danube's waters, through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eight horns or ten to meet the Euxine pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me to the far-renowned Duke Aymon, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither a stranger roved, my mother bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And 'tis a twelvemonth now since her, in quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of my French kin, I left with grief opprest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>"But reached not France, for southern tempest's spite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impelled me hither; lodged in royal bower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ten months or more; for — miserable wight! —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I reckon every day and every hour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guido the Savage I by name am hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill known and scarcely proved in warlike stower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here Argilon of Meliboea I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slew with ten warriors in his company.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Conqueror as well in other field confessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ten ladies are the partners of my bed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Selected at my choice, who are the best</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fairest damsels in this kingdom bred:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These I command, as well as all the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who of their female band have made me head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so would make another who in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like me, ten opposites to death would smite."</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>Sir Guido is besought of them to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why there appear so few of the male race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to declare if women there bear sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O'er men, as men o'er them in other place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He: "Since my fortune has been here to stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I oftentimes have heard relate the case;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now (according to the story told)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will, since it pleases you, the cause unfold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>"When, after twenty years, the Grecian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returned from Troy (ten years hostility</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The town endured, ten weary years were tost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Greeks, detained by adverse winds at sea),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They found their women had, for comforts lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pangs of absence, learned a remedy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, that they might not freeze alone in bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chosen young lovers in their husbands' stead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>"With others' children filled the Grecian crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their houses found, and by consent was past</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A pardon to their women; for they knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How ill they could endure so long a fast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the adulterous issue, as their due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek their fortunes on the world were cast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because the husbands would not suffer more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The striplings should be nourished from their store.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Some are exposed, and others underhand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their kindly mothers shelter and maintain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the adults, in many a various band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some here, some there dispersed, their living gain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arms are the trade of some, by some are scanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Letters and arts; another tills the plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One serves in court, by other guided go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The herd as pleases her who rules below.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"A boy departed with they youthful peers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was of cruel Clytemnestra born;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like lily fresh (he numbered eighteen years)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or blooming rose, new-gathered from the thorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He having armed a bark, his pinnace steers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In search of plunder, o'er the billows borne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him a hundred other youths engage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Picked from all Greece, and of their leader's age.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"The Cretans, who had banished in that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Idomeneus the tyrant of their land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And their new state to strengthen and upstay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were gathering arms and levying martial band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Phalantus' service by their goodly pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Purchased (so hight the youth who sought that strand),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all those others that his fortune run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who the Dictaean city garrison.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Amid the hundred cities of old Crete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was the Dictaean the most rich and bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fair and amorous dames the joyous seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Joyous with festive sports from morn to night:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (as her townsmen aye were wont to greet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stranger) with such hospitable rite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They welcomed these, it little lacked but they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Granted them o'er their households sovereign sway.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Youthful and passing fair were all the crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flower of Greece, who bold Phalantus led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that with those fair ladies at first view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stealing their hearts, full well the striplings sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since, fair in deed as show, they good and true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lovers evinced themselves and bold in bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in few days to them so grateful proved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above all dearest things they were beloved.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"After the war was ended on accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For which were hired Phalantus and his train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pay withdrawn, nor longer by the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was aught which the adventurous youth can gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they, for this, anew would go aboard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The unhappy Cretan women more complain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fuller tears on this occasion shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That if their fathers lay before them dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Long time and sorely all the striplings bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were, each apart, by them implored to stay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who since the fleeting youths they cannot hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leave brother, sire, and son, with these to stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of jewels and of weighty sums of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spoiling their households ere they wend their way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For so well was the plot concealed, no wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout all Crete was privy to their flight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"So happy was the hour, so fair the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When young Phalantus chose his time to flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They many miles had left the isle behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere Crete lamented her calamity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next, uninhabited by human kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This shore received them wandering o'er the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twas here they settled, with the plunder reft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And better weighed the issue of their theft.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>"With amorous pleasures teemed this place of rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ten days, to that roving company:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, as oft happens that in youthful breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abundance brings with it satiety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To quit their women, with one wish possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The band resolved to win their liberty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For never burden does so sore oppress</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As woman, when her love breeds weariness.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"They, who are covetous of spoil and gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ill-bested withal in stipend, know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That better means are wanted to maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many paramours, than shaft and bow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leaving thus alone the wretched train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence, with their riches charged the adventurers go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Puglia's pleasant land: there founded near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sea, Tarentum's city, as I hear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"The women when they find themselves betrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of lovers by whose faith they set most store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For many days remain so sore dismayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they seem lifeless statues on the shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But seeing lamentations nothing aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fruitless are the many tears they pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Begin to meditate, amid their pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What remedy for such an ill remains.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Some laying their opinions now before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The others, deem that to return to Crete</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is in their sad estate the wiser lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throwing themselves at sire and husband's feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than in those wilds, and on that desert shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To pine of want. Another troop repeat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They should esteem it were a worthier notion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To cast themselves into the neighbouring ocean;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"And lighter ill, if they as harlots went</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About the world, — beggars or slaves to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than offer up themselves for punishment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well merited by their iniquity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such and like schemes the unhappy dames present,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each harder than the other. Finally,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One Orontea amid these upstood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who drew her origin from Minos' blood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Youngest and fairest of the crew betrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She was, and wariest, and who least had erred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to Phalantus' arms had come a maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And left for him her father: she in word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well as in a kindling face, displayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How much with generous wrath her heart was stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, reprobating all advised before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spake; and adopted saw her better lore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"She would not leave the land they were upon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose soil was fruitful, and whose air was sane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout which many limpid rivers ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shaded with woods, and for the most part plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With creek and port, where stranger bark could shun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foul wind or storm, which vexed the neighbouring main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That might from Afric or from Egypt bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Victual or other necessary thing.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"For vengeance (she opined) they there should stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon man's sex, which had so sore offended.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She willed each bark and crew which to that bay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For shelter from the angry tempest wended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They should, without remorse, burn, sack, and slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor mercy be to any one extended.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such was the lady's motion, such the course</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Adopted; and the statute put in force.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"The women, when they see the changing heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turbid with tempest, hurry to the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With savage Orontea, by whom given</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was the fell law, the ruler of the land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of all barks into their haven driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make havoc dread with fire and murderous brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving no man alive, who may diffuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon this side or that the dismal news.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>" 'Twas thus with the male sex at enmity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some years the lonely women lived forlorn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then found that hurtful to themselves would be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The scheme, save changed; for if from them were born</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None to perpetuate their empery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The idle law would soon be held in scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fail together with the fruitful reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which they had hoped eternal should remain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>"So that some deal its rigour they allay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in four years, of all who made repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, by chance conducted to this bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chose out ten vigorous cavaliers and fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That for endurance in the amorous play</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against those hundred dames good champions were:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hundred they; and, of the chosen men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A husband was assigned to every ten.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Ere this, too feeble to abide the test,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many a one on scaffold lost his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now these ten warriors so approved the best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were made partakers of their rule and bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First swearing at the sovereign ladies' hest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they, if others to that port are led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No mercy shall to any one afford,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But one and all will put them to the sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"To swell, and next to child, and thence to fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The women turned to teeming wives began</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest they in time so many males should bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As might invade the sovereignty they plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that the government they hold so dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might finally from them revert to man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so, while these are children yet, take measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They never shall rebel against their pleasure.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"That the male sex may not usurp the sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It is enacted by the statute fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each mother should one boy preserve, and slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The others, or abroad exchange or sell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this, they these to various parts convey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the bearers of the children tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To truck the girls for boys in foreign lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or not, at least, return with empty hands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Nor by the women one preserved would be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If they without them could the race maintain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such all their mercy, all the clemency</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The law accords for theirs, not others' gain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dames all others sentence equally;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And temper but in this their statute's pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, not as was their former practice, they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All in their rage promiscuously slay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Did ten or twenty persons, or yet more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrive, they were imprisoned and put by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every day one only from the store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of victims was brought out by lot to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fane by Orontea built, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An altar raised to Vengeance; and to ply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As headsman, and dispatched the unhappy men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One was by lot selected from the ten.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"To that foul murderous shore by chance did fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After long years elapsed, a youthful wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose fathers sprung from good Alcides were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, of proof in arms, Elbanio hight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There was he seized, of peril scarce aware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As unsuspecting such a foul despite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, closely guarded, into prison flung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kept for like cruel use the rest among.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Adorned with every fair accomplishment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of pleasing face and manners was the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of a speech so sweet and eloquent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him the deaf adder might have stopt to hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that of him to Alexandria went</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tidings as of a precious thing and rare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She was the daughter of that matron bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Queen Orontea, that yet lived, though old.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Yet Orontea lived, while of that shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other settlers all were dead and gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now ten times as many such or more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had into strength and greater credit grown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor for ten forges, often closed, in store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have the ill-furnished band more files than one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the ten champions have as well the care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To welcome shrewdly all who thither fare.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Young Alexandria, who the blooming peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Burned to behold so praised on every part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The special pleasure him to see and hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Won from her mother; and, about to part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From him, discovers that the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remains the master of her tortured heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Finds herself bound, and that 'tis vain to stir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— A captive made by her own prisoner.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>" `I pity,' (said Elbanio) 'lady fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was in this cruel region known, as through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All other countries near or distant, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wandering sun sheds light and colouring hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I by your beauty's kindly charms should dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Which make each gentle spirit bound to you)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To beg my life; which always, at your will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should I be ready for your love to spill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>" `But since deprived of all humanity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are human bosoms in this cruel land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I shall not now request my life of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For fruitless would, I know, be the demand)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, whether a good knight or bad I be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ask but like such to die with arms in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not as one condemned to penal pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or like brute beast in sacrifice be slain.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>"The gentle maid, her eye bedimmed with tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In pity for the hapless youth, replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">`Though this land be more cruel and severe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than any other country, far and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each woman is not a Medaea here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As thou wouldst make her; and, if all beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were of such evil kind, in me alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should an exception to the rest be known.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `And though I, like so many here, of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was full of evil deeds and cruelty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I can well say, I never had before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fitting subject for my clemency.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But fiercer were I than a tiger, more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hard were my heart than diamonds, if in me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All hardness did not vanish and give place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before your courage, gentleness, and grace.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Ah! were the cruel statute less severe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the stranger to these shores conveyed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So should I not esteem my death too dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A ransom for thy worthier life were paid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But none is here so great, sir cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor of such puissance as to lend thee aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what thou askest, though a scanty grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were difficult to compass in this place.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>" `And yet will I endeavour to obtain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thee, before thou perish, this content;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though much, I fear, 'twill but augment thy pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thee protracted death but more torment.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">`So I the ten encounter,' (said again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Elbanio), `I at heart, am confident</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Myself to save, and enemies to slay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though made of iron were the whole array.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"To this the youthful Alexandria nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made answer, saving with a piteous sigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the conference a bosom brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gored with deep wounds, beyond all remedy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Orontea she repaired, and wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On her to will the stripling should not die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should he display such courage and such skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As with his single hand the ten to kill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Queen Orontea straightway bade unite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her council, and bespoke the assembled band:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">`It still behoves us place the prowest wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom we can find, to guard our ports and strand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, to discover whom to take or slight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Tis fitting that we prove the warrior's hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest, to our loss, the election made be wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And we enthrone the weak and slay the strong.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `I deem it fit, if you the counsel shown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deem fit as well, in future to ordain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That each upon our coast by Fortune thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before he in the temple shall be slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall have the choice, instead of this, alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Battle against ten others to maintain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if he conquer, shall the port defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With other comrades, pardoned to that end.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>" `I say this, since to strive against our ten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seems, that one imprisoned here will dare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, if he stands against so many men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Heaven, deserves that we should hear his prayer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if he rashly boasts himself, again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As worthily due the punishment should bear.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here Orontea ceased; on the other side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her the oldest of the dames replied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>" `The leading cause, for which to entertain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This intercourse with men we first agreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was not because we, to defend this reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of their assistance stood in any need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For we have skill and courage to maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This of ourselves, and force, withal, to speed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would that we could in all as well avail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without their succour, nor succession fail!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>" `But since this may not be, we some have made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(These few) partakers of our company;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, ten to one, we be not overlaid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor they possess them of the sovereignty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that we for protection need their aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But simply to increase and multiply.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than be their powers to this sole fear addressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be they sluggards, idle for the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `To keep among us such a puissant wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our first design would render wholly vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If one can singly slay ten men in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How many women can he not restrain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If our ten champions had possessed such might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They the first day would have usurped the reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To arm a hand more powerful than your own</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is an ill method to maintain the throne.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Reflect withal, that if your prisoner speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that he kill ten champions in the fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hundred women's cry, whose lords will bleed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath his falchion, shall your ears dismay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let him not 'scape by such a murderous deed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, if he would, propound some other way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Yet if he of those ten supply the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And please a hundred women, grant him grace.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"This was severe Artemia's sentiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So was she named) and had her counsel weighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Elbanio to the temple had been sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To perish by the sacrificial blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Orontea, willing to content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her daughter, to the matron answer made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And urged so many reasons, and so wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The yielding senate granted what she ought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Elbanio's beauty (for so fair to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never was any cavalier beside)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So strongly works upon the youthful crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which in that council sit the state to guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the opinion of the older few</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That like Artemia think, is set aside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And little lacks but that the assembled race</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Absolve Elbanio by especial grace.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"To pardon him in fine the dames agreed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, after slaying his half-score, and when</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He in the next assault as well should speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not with a hundred women, but with ten;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, furnished to his wish with arms and steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next day he was released from dungeon-den,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And singly with ten warriors matched in plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who by his arm successively were slain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"He to new proof was put the following night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against ten damsels naked and alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When so successful was the stripling's might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He took the 'say of all the troop, and won</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such grace with Orontea, that the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was by the dame adopted for her son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from her Alexandria had to wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With those whom he had proved in amorous strife.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And him she left with Alexandria, heir</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To this famed city, which from her was hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So he and all who his successors were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should guard the law which willed, whatever wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conducted hither by his cruel star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon this miserable land did light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should have his choice to perish by the knife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or singly with ten foes contend to strife.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"And if he should dispatch the men by day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At night should prove him with the female crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if so fortunate that in this play</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He proved again the conqueror, he, as due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The female band, as prince and guide, should sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his ten consorts at his choice renew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And reign with them, till other should arrive</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of stouter hand, and him of life deprive.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>"They for two thousand years nigh past away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This usage have maintained, and yet maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The impious rite; and rarely passes day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But stranger wight is slaughtered in the fane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he, Elbanio-like, ten foes assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(And such sometimes is found) he oft is slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the first charge: nor, in a thousand, one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other feat, of which I spake, has done,</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Yet some there are have done it, though so few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They may be numbered on the fingers; one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the victorious cavaliers, but who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reigned with his ten short time, was Argilon:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, smote by me, whom ill wind hither blew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight to his eternal rest is gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would I with him that day had filled a grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than in such scorn survive a slave!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"For amorous pleasures, laughter, game, and play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which evermore delight the youthful breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gem, the purple garment, rich array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in his city place before the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Little, by Heaven, the wretched man appay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who of his liberty is dispossest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not to have the power to leave this shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To me seems shameful servitude and sore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"To know I wear away life's glorious spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In such effeminate and slothful leisure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is to my troubled heart a constant sting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And takes away the taste of every pleasure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fame bears my kindred's praise on outstretched wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even to the skies; and haply equal measure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I of the glories of my blood might share</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I united with my brethren were.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Methinks my fate does such injurious deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By me, condemned to servitude so base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he who turns to grass the generous steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To run amid the herd of meaner race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because unfit for war or worthier meed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through blemish, or disease of sight or pace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor hoping but by death, alas! to fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So vile a service, I desire to die."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Here Guido ceased to address the martial peers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cursed withal the day, in high disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he achieved o'er dames and cavaliers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The double victory which bestowed that reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho hides his name, and silent hears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until to him by many a sign is plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That this Sir Guido is, as he had said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The issue of his kinsman Aymon's bed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Then cried: "The English duke, Astolpho, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy cousin am," and clipt him round the waist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in a kindly act of courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not without weeping, kist him and embraced.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, "Kinsman dear, thy birth to certify</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No better sign thy mother could have placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About thy neck. Enough! that sword of thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And courage, vouch thee of our valiant line."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Guido, who gladly would in other place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So near a kin have welcomed, in dismay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beholds him here and with a mournful face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knowing, if he himself survives the fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho will be doomed to slavery base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His fate deferred but till the following day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he shall perish, if the duke is free:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that one's good the other's ill shall be.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He grieves, as well, the other cavaliers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should through his means for ever captive be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, that he should, if slain, those martial peers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deliver by his death from slavery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since if Marphisa from one quicksand clears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The troop, yet these from other fails to free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She will have won the victory in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For they will be enslaved, and she be slain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>On the other hand, the stripling's age, in May</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of youth, with courtesy and valour fraught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the maid and comrades with such sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Touching their breasts with love and pity, wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they of freedom, for which he must pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The forfeit of his life, nigh loathed the thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if Marphisa him perforce must kill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She is resolved as well herself to spill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Join thou with us," she to Sir Guido cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"And we from hence will sally." — "From within</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These walls to sally" — Guido on his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Answered, "Ne'er hope: With me you lose or win."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"— I fear not, I," the martial maid replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"To execute whatever I begin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor know what can securer path afford</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than that which I shall open with my sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Such proof of thy fair prowess have I made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With thee I every enterprise would dare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To-morrow when about the palisade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The crowds assembled in the circus are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let us on every side the mob invade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether they fly or for defence prepare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then give the town to fire, and on their bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of earth to wolf and vulture leave the dead."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>He: "Ready shalt thou find me in the strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To follow thee or perish at thy side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But let us hope not to escape with life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enough, is vengeance somedeal satisfied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere death; for oft ten thousand, maid and wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I in the place have witnessed; and, outside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As many castle, wall and port, defend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor know I certain way from hence to wend."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And were there more (Marphisa made reply)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Xerxes led, our squadrons to oppose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than those rebel spirits from the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast out to dwell amid perpetual woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All in one day should by this weapon die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wert thou with me, at least, not with my foes."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her again, "No project but must fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Sir Guido said) I know, save this avail."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"This only us can save, should it succeed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This, which but now remembered I shall teach.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To dames alone our laws the right concede</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sally, or set foot upon the beach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence to one of mine in this our need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must I commit myself, and aid beseech;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose love for me, by perfect friendship tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has oft by better proof than this been tried.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"No less than me would she desire that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should 'scape from slavery, so she went with me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that, without her rival's company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She of my lot should sole partaker be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She bark or pinnace, in the harbour nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall bid, while yet 'tis dark, prepare for sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which shall await your sailors, rigged and yare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For sailing, when they thither shall repair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Behind me, in a solid band comprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye merchants, mariners and warriors, who,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Driven to this city, have set up your rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath this roof (for which my thanks are due)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— You have to force your way with stedfast breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If adversaries interrupt our crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Tis thus I hope, by succour of the sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To clear a passage through the cruel horde."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Do as thou wilt," Marphisa made reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"I of escape am confident withal:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And likelier 'twere that by my hand should die</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The martial race, encompassed by this wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than any one should ever see me fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or guess by other sign that fears appall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I would my passage force in open day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shameful in my sight were other way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"I wot if I were for a woman known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Honour and place from women I might claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here gladly entertained, and classed as one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply among their chiefs of highest fame:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But privilege or favour will I none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unshared by those with whom I hither came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too base it were, did I depart or free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remain, to leave the rest in slavery."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>These speeches by Marphisa made, and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Showed that what only had restrained her arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was the respect she to the safety bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the companions whom her wrath might harm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By this alone withheld form taking sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And signal vengeance on the female swarm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence she left in Guido's care to shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What seemed the fittest means for their escape.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Sir Guido speaks that night with Alery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So the most faithful of his wives was hight)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor needs long prayer to make the dame agree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disposed already to obey the knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She takes a ship and arms the bark for sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stowed with her richest chattels for their flight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feigning design, as soon as dawn ensues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sail with her companions on a cruise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>She into Guido's palace had before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bid sword and spear and shield and cuirass bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the intent to furnish from this store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Merchants and sailors that half naked were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some watch, and some repose upon the floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rest and guard among each other share;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oft marking, still with harness on their backs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If ruddy yet with light the orient wax.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Not yet from earth's hard visage has the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lifted her veil of dim and dingy dye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarcely Lycaon's child, her furrow done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has turned about her ploughshare in the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When to the theatre the women run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would the fearful battle's end espy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As swarming bees upon their threshold cluster,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who bent on change of realm in springtide muster.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>With warlike trumpet, drum, and sound of horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The people make the land and welkin roar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Summoning thus their chieftain to return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And end of unfinished warfare. Covered o'er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With arms stand Aquilant and Gryphon stern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the redoubted duke from England's shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa, Dudo, Sansonet, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knights or footmen harboured in that hall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Hence to descend towards the sea or port</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The way across the place of combat lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor was there other passage, long or short.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Guido so to his companions cries:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having ceased his comrades to exhort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To do their best set forth in silent wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the place appeared, amid the throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Head of a squad above a hundred strong.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Toward the other gate Sir Guido went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hurrying his band, but, gathered far and nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mighty multitude, for aye intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To smite, and clad in arms, when they descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The comrades whom he leads, perceive his bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And truly deem he is about to fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All in a thought betake them to their bows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at the portal part the knight oppose.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Sir Guido and the cavaliers who go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath that champion's guidance, and before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The others bold Marphisa, were not slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To strike, and laboured hard to force the door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But such a storm of darts from ready bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dealing on all sides death or wounding sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was rained in fury on the troop forlorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They feared at last to encounter skaith and scorn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Of proof the corslet was each warrior wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who without this would have had worse to fear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sansonnet's horse was slain, and that which bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa: to himself the English peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaimed, "Why wait I longer? As if more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My horn could ever succour me than here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since the sword steads not, I will make assay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If with my bugle I can clear the way."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As he was customed in extremity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to his mouth applied the bugle's round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wide world seemed to tremble, earth and sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he in air discharged the horrid sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such terror smote the dames, that bent to fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When in their ears the deafening horn was wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only they the gate unguarded left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But from the circus reeled, of wit bereft.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>As family, awaked in sudden wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaps from the windows and from lofty height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Periling life and limb, when in surprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They see, now near, the fire's encircling light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had, while slumber sealed their heavy eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By little and by little waxed at night:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reckless of life, thus each, impelled by dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At sound of that appalling bugle fled.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>Above, below, and here and there, the rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rise in confusion and attempt to fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At once, above a thousand swarm about</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each entrance, to each other's lett, and lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In heaps: from window these, or stage without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leap headlong; in the press these smothered die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Broken is many an arm, and many a head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one lies crippled, and another dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>Amid the mighty ruin which ensued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cries pierce the very heavens on every part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where'er the sound is heard, the multitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In panic at the deafening echo, start.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When you are told that without hardihood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appear the rabble, and of feeble heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This need not more your marvel; for by nature</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hare is evermore a timid creature.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>But of Marphisa what will be your thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Guido late so furious? — of the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Young sons of Olivier, that lately wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such deeds in honour of their lineage? who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lately a hundred thousand held as nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now, deprived of courage, basely flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As ring-doves flutter and as coneys fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who hear some mighty noise resounding nigh.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>For so to friend as stranger, noxious are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The powers that in the enchanted horn reside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sansonet, Guido, follow, with the pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or brethren bold, Marphisa terrified.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor flying, can they to such distance fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that their ears are dinned. On every side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho, on his foaming courser borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lends louder breath to his enchanted horn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>One sought the sea, and one the mountain-top,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One fled the hide herself in forest hoar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this, who turned not once nor made a stop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not for ten days her headlong flight forbore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These from the bridge in that dread moment drop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never to climb the river's margin more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So temple, house and square and street were drained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That nigh unpeopled the wide town remained.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa, Guido, and the brethren two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Sansonetto, pale and trembling, hie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the sea, and behind these the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of frighted mariners and merchants fly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And 'twixt the forts, in bark, prepared with view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To their escape, discover Alery;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in sore haste receives the warriors pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bids them ply their oars and make all sail.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The duke within and out the town had bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the surrounding hills to the sea-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of its people emptied every street.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All fly before the deafening sound, and hide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many in panic, seeking a retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lurk, in some place obscure and filthy stied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many, not knowing whither to repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plunge in the neighbouring sea, and perish there.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The duke arrives, seeking the friendly band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he had hoped to find upon the quay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He turns and gazes round the desert strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And none is there — directs along the bay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His eyes, and now, far distant from the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beholds the parting frigate under way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that the paladin, for his escape —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vessel gone — must other project shape.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Let him depart! nor let it trouble you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he so long a road must beat alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, never without fear, man journeys through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wild paynim countries: danger is there none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But what he with his bugle may eschew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose dread effect the English duke has shown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let his late companions be our care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who trembling to the beach had made repair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>They from that cruel and ensanguined ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seaward, under all their canvas, bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having gained such offing, that the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that alarming horn was heard no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unwonted shame inflicted such a wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That all a face of burning crimson wore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One dares not eye the other, and they stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With downcast looks, a mute and mournful band.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>Fixed on his course, the pilot passes by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cyprus and Rhodes, and ploughs the Aegean sea:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beholds a hundred islands from him fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Malea's fearful headland; fanned by free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And constant wind, sees vanish from the eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Greek Morea; rounding Sicily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the Tuscan sea his frigate veers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, coasting Italy's fair region, steers:</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>Last rises Luna, where his family</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is waiting his return, the patron hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gives thanks to God at having passed the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without more harm, and makes the well-known shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here, offering passage to their company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They find a master, ready to unmoor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For France, and that same day his pinnace climb;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence wafted to Marseilles in little time.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>There was not Bradamant, who used to sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The land, and had that city in her care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who (if present there) to make some stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have compelled them by her courteous prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They disembarked; and that same hour away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did bold Marphisa at a venture fare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bidding adieu to salvage Guido's wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the four, her comrades in the strife:</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Saying she deems unfitting for a knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fare in like great fellowship; that so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The starlings and the doves in flock unite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every beast who fears — the stag and doe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But hawk and eagle, that in other's might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Put not their trust, for ever singly go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lion, bear, and tyger, roam alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who fear no prowess greater than their own.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>But none with her opine, and, in the lack</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a companion, singly must she fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So then, alone and friendless, she a track</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uncouth pursues, and through a wooded lair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gryphon the white and Aquilant the black</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Take road more beaten with the other pair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the following day a castle see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within which they are harboured courteously.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>Courteously I, in outward show, would say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For soon the contrary was made appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since he, the castellain, who with display</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of kindness sheltered them and courteous cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The night ensuing took them as they lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Couched in their beds, secure and void of fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor from the snare would he his prisoners loose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till they had sworn to observe an evil use.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVI-->
			<p>
				<span>But I will first pursue the martial maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere more of these, fair sir, I shall proclaim.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond the Durence, Rhone, and Saone she strayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the foot of sunny mountain came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there approaching in black gown arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside a torrent, saw an ancient dame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with long journey weak, and wearied sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared, but pined by melancholy more.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVII-->
			<p>
				<span>This was the beldam who had wont to ply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Serving the robbers in the caverned mount;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither stern Justice sent (that they might die</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By that good paladin) Anglante's count.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The aged harridan, for cause which I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To you shall in another place recount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now many days by path obscure had flown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still fearing lest her visage should be known.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The semblance now of foreign cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She in Marphisa saw, in arms and vest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence she flies not her, though wont to fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As being natives of that land) the rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Nay, with security and open cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stops at the ford the damsel to arrest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stops at the ford — where that old beldam meets</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa, and with fair encounter greets.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And next implored the maid, she of her grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would bear her on the croupe to the other shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa, who was come of gentle race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hag with her across the torrent bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And is content to bear, till she can place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a securer road the beldam hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clear of a spacious marish: as its end</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They see a cavalier towards them wend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CX-->
			<p>
				<span>In shining armour and in fair array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior rode on saddle richly wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the river, and upon his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him a single squire and damsel brought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of passing beauty was the lady gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But little pleasing was her semblance haught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All overblown with insolence and pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthy the cavalier who was her guide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXI-->
			<p>
				<span>He of Maganza was a count, who bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady with him (Pinabello hight):</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The same who Bradamant, some months before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had plunged into a hollow cave in spite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those many sobs, those burning sighs and sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those tears which had nigh quenched the warrior's sight, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All for the damsel were, now at his side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then by that false necromancer stied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXII-->
			<p>
				<span>But when the magic tower upon the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was razed, the dwelling of Atlantes hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every one was free to rove at will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through Bradamant's good deed and virtuous lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel, who had been compliant still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the desires of Pinabel before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rejoined him, and now journeying in a round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him, from castle was to castle bound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As wanton and ill-customed, when she spies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa's aged charge approaching near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She cannot rein her saucy tongue, but plies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here, in her petulance, with laugh and jeer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa haught, unwont in any wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outrage from whatsoever part to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes answer to the dame, in angry tone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That handsomer than her she deems the crone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And that she this would prove upon her knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With pact that she might strip the bonnibell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of gown and palfrey, if, o'erthrown in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her champion from his goodly courser fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— In silence to have overpast the slight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have been sin and shame in Pinabel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for short answer seized his shield and spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wheeled, and drove at her in fierce career.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa grasped a mighty lance, and thrust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encountering him, at Pinabello's eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stretched him so astounded in the dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That motionless an hour the warrior lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa, now victorious in the just,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gave orders to strip off the glorious guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ornaments wherewith the maid was drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the spoils her ancient crone invest;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And willed that she should don the youthful weed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bedizened at the haughty damsel's cost;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And took away as well the goodly steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which her had thither borne, and — bent to post</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On her old track — with her the hag will speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who seems most hideous when adorned the most.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Three days the tedious road the couple beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without adventure needful to repeat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>On the fourth day they met a cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who came in fury galloping alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If you the stranger's name desire to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I tell you 'twas Zerbino, a king's son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of beauty and of worth example rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now grieved and angered, as unvenged of one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who a great act of courtesy, which fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior would have done, had rendered vain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Vainly the young Zerbino, through the glade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had chased that man of his, who this despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had done him, who himself so well conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Away and took such 'vantage in his flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So hid by wood and mist, which overlaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The horizon and bedimmed the morning-light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he escaped Zerbino's grasp, and lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Concealed until his wrath was past away.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Zerbino laughed parforce, when he descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That beldam's face, though he was full of rage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For too ill-sorted seemed her vest of pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her foul visage, more deformed by age;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the proud Marphisa, at her side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prince, exclaimed, "Sir warrior, you are sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In having chosen damsel of a sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom none, I ween, will grudge you should escort."</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Older than Sibyl seemed the beldam hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As far as from her wrinkles one might guess),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the youthful ornaments she wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Looked like an ape which men in mockery dress;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now appears more foul, as angered sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While rage and wrath her kindled eyes express.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For none can do a woman worse despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than to proclaim her old and foul to sight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>To have sport of him — as she had — an air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of wrath the maid assumed upon her part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the prince, "By Heaven, more passing fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is this my lady than thou courteous art,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaimed in answer; "though I am aware</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What thou hast uttered comes not from thy heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou wilt not own her beauty; a device</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Put on to masque thy sovereign cowardice.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And of what stamp would be that cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who found such fair and youthful dame alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without protection, in the forest drear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor sought to make the lovely weft his own?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— "So well she sorts with thee," replied the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">" `Twere ill that she were claimed by any one:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor I of her would thee in any wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deprive; God rest thee merry with thy prize!</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"But would thou prove what is my chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On other ground I to thy wish incline;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet deem me not of such perversity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to tilt with thee for this prize of thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or fair or foul, let her remain thy fee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I would not, I, such amity disjoin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well are ye paired, and safely would I swear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou as valiant art as she is fair."</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>To him Marphisa, "Thou in thy despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shalt try to bear from me the dame away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will not suffer that so fair a sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou shouldst behold, nor seek to gain the prey."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her the prince, "I know not wherefore wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should suffer pain and peril in affray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Striving for victory, where, for his pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The victor losses, and the vanquished gains."</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"If this condition please not, other course</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which ill thou canst refuse, I offer thee,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Marphisa cried): "If thou shalt me unhorse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this our tourney, she remains with me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if I win, I give her thee parforce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then prove we now who shall without her be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Premised, if loser, thou shalt be her guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherever it may please the dame to ride."</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"And be it so," Zerbino cried, and wheeled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swiftly his foaming courser for the shock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rising in his stirrups scowered the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Firm in his seat, and smote, with levelled stock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For surer aim, the damsel in mid-shield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But she sate stedfast as a metal rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at the warrior's morion thrust so well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She clean out-bore him senseless from the sell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Much grieved the prince, to whom in other fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The like misfortune had not chanced before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had unhorsed some thousands in his day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now shamed, he thought for ever. Troubled sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mute long space upon the ground he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, when 'twas recollected, grieved the more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he had promised, and that he was bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To accompany the hag where'er she wound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Turning about to him the victoress cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laughing, "This lady I to thee present,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the more beauty is in her descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The more that she is thine I am content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now in my place her champion and her guide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But do not thou thy plighted faith repent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that thou fail, as promised, to attend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dame, wherever she may please to wend."</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Without awaiting answer, to career</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She spurred her horse, and vanished in the wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino, deeming her a cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cried to the crone, "By whom am I subdued?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, knowing 'twould be poison to his ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that it would inflame his angered blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She in reply, "It was a damsel's blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from thy lofty saddle laid thee low.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>"She, for her matchless force, deservedly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Usurps from cavalier the sword and lance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And even from the east is come to try</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her strength against the paladins of France."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only was his cheek of crimson dye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such shame Zerbino felt as his mischance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Little was wanting (so his blushes spread)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all the arms he wore had glowed as red.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>He mounts, and blames himself in angry wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that he had no better kept his seat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within herself the beldam laughs, and tries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Scottish warrior more to sting and heat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him for promised convoy she applies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, who knows that there is no retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stands like tired courser, who in pensive fit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hangs down his ears, controlled by spur and bit.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>And, sighing deeply, cries, in his despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Fell Fortune, with what change dost thou repay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My loss! she who was fairest of the fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who should be mine, by thee is snatched away!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thinkest thou the evil to repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her whom thou hast given to me this day?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than make like ill exchange, less cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It were to undergo a total loss.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Her, who for virtue and for beauteous form</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was never equalled, nor will ever be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou on the rocks hast wrecked, in wintry storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As food for fowls and fishes of the sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her who should have fed the earth-bred worm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Preserved beyond her date, some ten or score</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of years, to harass and torment me more."</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>So spake Zerbino, and like grief displaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his despairing words and woful mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such an odious acquisition made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he had suffered when he lost his queen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The aged woman now, from what he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though she before Zerbino had not seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perceived 'twas him of whom, in the thieves' hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Isabel of Gallicia erst had told.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>If you remember what was said before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This was the hag who 'scaped out of the cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Isabella, who had wounded sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino's heart, was long detained a slave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who oft had told how she her native shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had left, and, launching upon ocean's wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her frigate, had been wrecked by wind and swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the rocky shallows near Rochelle.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And she to her Zerbino's goodly cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gentle features had pourtrayed so well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the hag hearing him, and now more near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Letter her eyes upon his visage dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discerned it was the youth for whom, whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had grieved at heart the prisoned Isabel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose loss she in the cavern more deplored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than being captive to the murderous horde.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The beldam, hearing what in rage and grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino vents, perceives the youth to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deceived, and cheated by the false belief</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Isabel had perished in the sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And though she might have given the prince relief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knowing the truth, in her perversity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What would have made him joyful she concealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And only what would cause him grief revealed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Hear, you that are so proud," (the hag pursues)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"And flout me with such insolence and scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You would entreat me fair to have the news</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know of her whose timeless death you mourn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to be strangled would I rather choose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be into a thousand pieces torn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereas if you had made me kinder cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply from me the secret might you hear."</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>As the dog's rage is quickly overblown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who flies the approaching robber to arrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If the thief proffer piece of bread or bone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of offer other lure which likes him best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As readily Zerbino to the crone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Humbled himself, and burned to know the rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, in the hints of the old woman, read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she had news of her he mourned as dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXL-->
			<p>
				<span>And with more winning mien to her applied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her did supplicate, entreat, conjure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By men and gods, the truth no more to hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did she benign or evil lot endure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hard and pertinacious crone replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Nought shalt thou hear, thy comfort to assure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Isabel has not yielded up her breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But lives a life she would exchange for death.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXLI-->
			<p>
				<span>"She, since thou heardest of her destiny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within few days, has fallen into the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of more than twenty. If restored to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Think now, if thou hast hope to crop her flower."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— "Curst hag, how well thou shapest thy history,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet knowest it is false! Her virgin dower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Secure from brutal wrong, would none invade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though in the power of twenty were the maid."</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXLII-->
			<p>
				<span>Questioning of the maid, he when and where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She saw her, vainly asked the beldam hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, ever restive to Zerbino's prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To what she had rehearsed would add no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prince in the beginning spoke her fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next to cut her throat in fury swore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But prayers and menaces alike were weak;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor could he make the hideous beldam speak.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>At length Zerbino to his tongue gave rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since speaking to the woman booted nought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarcely his heart found room within his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such dread suspicion had her story wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to find Isabella was so pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her in the midst of fire he would have sought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But could not hurry more than was allowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By her his convoy, since he so had vowed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>They hence, by strange and solitary way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rove, as the beldam does her will betoken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor climbing, nor descending hill, survey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each other's face, nor any word is spoken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when the sun upon the middle day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had turned his back, their silence first was broken</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By cavalier encountered in their way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What followed the ensuing strain will say.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
