<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-31" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Rinaldo and Dudon fight; then friendship make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to each other fitting honour pay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Agramant’s host the united champions break,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scatter it, like chaff, in disarray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brandimart wages war, for Roland’s sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Rodomont, and loses in the fray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This while, for good Bayardo, with more pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contend Rinaldo and the Sericane.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>What sweeter, gladder, state could be possest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than falls to the enamoured bosom’s share?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What happier mode of life, what lot more blest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than evermore the chains of love to wear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were not the lover, ’mid his joys, distrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By that suspicious fear, that cruel care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That martyrdom, which racks the suffering sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That frenzied rage, which jealousy is hight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>For by all bitters else which interpose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before enjoyment of this choicest sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love is augmented, to perfection grows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And takes a finer edge; to drink and eat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hunger and thirst the palate so dispose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And flavour more our beverage and our meat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feebly that wight can estimate the charms</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of peace, who never knew the pain of arms.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>That which the heart aye sees, though undiscerned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of human eye, we can support in peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him long absent, to his love returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A longer absence is but joy’s increase.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Service may be endured, though nought is earned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that the hope of guerdon does not cease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For worthy service in the end is paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit its wages should be long delayed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>Scorn, and repulse, and finally each pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of suffering love, his every martyrdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through recollection, make us entertain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Delights with greater rapture, when they come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if weak mind be poisoned by that bane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That filthy pest, conceived in Stygian home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though joy ensue, with all its festive pleasures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wretched lover ill his comfort measures.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>This is that cruel and envenomed wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where neither salve nor portion soothes the smart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor figure made by witch, nor murmured sound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor star benign observed in friendly part;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor aught beside by Zoroaster found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inventor as he was of magic art.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell wound, which, more than every other woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes wretched man despair, and lays him low!</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>O! cruel wound! incapable of cure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflicted with such ease on lover’s breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less by false suspicion than by sure!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O wound! whose pangs so wofully molest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They reason and our better wit obscure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from it natural bent our judgment wrest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wound, which against all reason didst destroy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel of Dordona’s every joy!</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>I speak not of what fatal mischief wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hippalca’s and the brother’s bitter blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I speak of fell and cruel tidings brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some few days after; for the former woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weighed with this other, was a thing of nought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This after some digression will I show:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first Rinaldo’s feats I must declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with his troop to Paris made repair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The following day they met a cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards evening, with a lady by his side;<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sable his shield, and sable was his gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose ground a bar of silver did divide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As foremost, and of seeming force, the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Young Richardetto to the joust defend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, prompt for battle, wheeled his courser round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for the tourney took sufficient ground.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>Between those knights no further parley past:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without more question, charged the martial two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo with the friendly troop stood fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And looked to see what issue would ensue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Him from his saddle will I quickly cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If firm the footing, and mine arm prove true;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within himself young Richardetto cries:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that encounter ends in other wise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>Him underneath the vizor’s sight offends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stranger champion, of the sable weed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With force so fell, that he the youth extends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above two lances’ length beyond his steed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quickly to venge the knight Alardo wends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But falls himself astounded on the mead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore handled, and unhorsed by such a stroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His buckler in the cruel shock is broke.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>His lance Guichardo levelled, when he spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outstretched upon the field the brethren two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although “Halt, halt,” (renowned Rinaldo cried,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“For this third course to me is justly due:”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he as yet his helmet had not tied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that Guichardo to the combat flew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He kept his seat no better than the twain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith, like them, extended on the plain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>All to be foremost in the joust contend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Richardo, Malagigi, Viviane:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to their strife Rinaldo puts an end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He shows himself in arms before the train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saying, “ ’Tis time that we to Paris wend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For us too long the tourney will detain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I expect till each his course has run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ye are all unseated, one by one.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>So spake the knight, yet spake not in a tone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be o’erheard in what he inly said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thus foul scorn would to the rest have done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both now had wheeled, and fierce encounter made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the career Rinaldo was not thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who all the banded kinsmen much outweighed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their spears like brittle glass to pieces went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not an inch the champions backward bent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The chargers such a rough encounter made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That on his crupper sank each staggering horse:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo’s rose so quick, he might be said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarcely to interrupt his rapid course:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stranger’s broke his spine and shoulder-blade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That other shocked him with such desperate force.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When his lord sees him slain, he leaves his seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in an instant springs upon his feet;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>And to his foe, that having wheeled anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approached with hand unarmed, the warrior cried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Sir, to the goodly courser whom ye slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because, whenas he lived, he was my pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I deem, I ill should render honour due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thus unvenged by my good arm he died;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so fall on, and do as best ye may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For we parforce must meet in new assay.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>To him Rinaldo, “If we for thy horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have to contend in fight, and nought beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Take comfort, for I ween that with no worse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou, in his place, by me shalt be supplied.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Thou errest if thou deem’st his loss the source</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of my regret” (the stranger knight replied);</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“But I, since thou divinest not my speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To thee my meaning will more plainly teach.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“I should esteem it were a foul misdeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless I proved thee also with the brand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, if thou in this other dance succeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better or worse than me, would understand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, as it please, afoot or on thy steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Attack me, so it be with arms in hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am content all vantage to afford;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such my desire to try thee with the sword!”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Not long Rinaldo paused: he cried, “I plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My promise not to balk thee of the fray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for I deem thou art a valiant knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lest thou umbrage take at mine array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These shall go on before, nor other wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside a page, to hold my horse, shall stay.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So spake Mount Alban’s lord; and to his band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wend their way the warrior gave command.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>To that king paladin with praise replied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stranger peer; alighting on the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo to the valet, at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Consigned the goodly steed Bayardo’s rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when his banner he no longer spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now widely distant with the warrior’s train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His buckler braced, his biting faulchion drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the field defied the knight anew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>And now each other they in fight assail:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was never seen a feller strife in show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Neither believes his foeman can avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long, in that fierce debate, against his blow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when they knew, well neighed in doubtful scale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they were fitly matched, for weal or woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They laid their fury and their pride apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for their vantage practised every art.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Their cruel and despiteous blows resound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Re-echoing wide, what time the valiant twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With cantlets of their shields now strew the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now with their faulchions sever plate and chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet more behoves to parry than to wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If either knight his footing would maintain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the first fault in fence, by either made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will with eternal mischief be appaid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>One hour and more than half another, stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knights in battle; and the golden sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already was beneath the tumbling flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the horizon veiled with darkness dun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet had they reposed, nor interlude</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had been, since that despiteous fight begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twixt these, whom neither ire nor rancour warms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But simple thirst of fame excites to arms.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo in himself revolving weighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was the stranger knight, so passing stout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That not alone him bravely had gainsaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But oft endangered in that deadly bout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And has so harassed with his furious blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He of its final issue stands in doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—He that the strife was ended would be fain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that his knightly honour took no stain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The stranger knight, upon the other side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As little of his valiant foeman knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor in that lord Mount Alban’s chief descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In warfare so renowned all countries through.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And upon whom, with such small cause defied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His faulchion he in deadly combat drew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He was assured he could not have in fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Experience of a more redoubted wight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>He gladly would be quit of the emprize</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He undertook to venge his courser’s fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, could he, without blame, a mean devise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would fain withdraw from that disastrous brawl.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So overcast already were the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their cruel strokes well nigh fell harmless all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both blindly strike; more blindly yet those lords</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Parry the stroke, who scarce discern their swords.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>He of Mount Alban is the first to say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“They should not combat darkling, on the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But should their duel till such time delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As slow Arcturus should have turned his wain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(And adds,) “as safely as himself might stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The foe in his pavilion, of his train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As duly tended, honoured, and well seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he in any place had ever been.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>To pray him has Rinaldo little need:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He courteously accepts him for his host;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thither the united warriors speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where lies Mount Alban’s troop in chosen post.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From his attendant squire a goodly steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sumptuous housings gorgeously embossed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo takes, with tempered sword and spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these bestows upon the cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>For Montalbano’s lord the stranger guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The baron recognised, with whom he came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because, before they reached their place of rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paladin had chanced himself to name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (for they brethren were) with love opprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His tenderness him wholly overcame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And touched with kind affection, at his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From his full eyes the tears of pleasure start.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Guido the savage was that cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, with Marphisa leagued, the martial maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sansonet, and the sons of Olivier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long sailed the sea, as I erewhile have said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From earlier meeting with his kindred dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Pinnabel, the felon knight, delayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seized by that traitor, and by him detained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To enforce the wicked law he had ordained.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Sir Guido, when he knew his host to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, famed above each famous knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he had burned with more desire to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than ever blind man covets the lost light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In rapture cries, “What fortune tempted me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With you, my lord, to strive in deadly fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom long I have beloved, and love, whose worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I prize above all dwellers upon earth?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Me on the distant bank of Euxine’s flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(I Guido am yclept) Constantia bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conceived of the illustrious seed and good</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of generous Aymon, as ye likewise are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To visit you and my bold brotherhood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is the occasion, hither I repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, where to honour you I had in thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see my coming has but mischief wrought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“But that I neither ye nor the others knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must for so foul a fault be my excuse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if I can amend it, bid me do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whate’er thou wilt, nor ought will I refuse.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, on this part and that, between the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of interchanged embraces there was truce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Take you no farther thought upon your side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The battle to excuse,” Rinaldo cried.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“For in complete assurance that you are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A real offset of our ancient tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You could no better testimony bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than the tried valour which in you we see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If your demeanour more pacific were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We ill should have believed your ancestry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since neither lion from the doe proceeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor fearful pigeon, hawk or eagle breeds.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>While neither they through talk their journey stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Neither through speed abate their talk, those two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reached the pavilions where the kinsmen lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There good Rinaldo, crying to his crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That this was Guido, whom so many a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They had impatiently desired to view,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much pleased the friendly troop; and, at his sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All like his father deemed the stranger knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>I will not tell what welcome to the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made Richardet, Alardo, and those twain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What Malagigi, what Sir Aldigier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gallant Vivian, of that kindred train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What every captain, every cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What Guido spake, what they replied again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I for conclusion of my tale will say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He was well greeted of the whole array.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Ever, I deem, good Guido would have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dear to his brethren bold; but welcomed more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was now the valiant knight, and better seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That at another time, as needed sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the sun, garlanded with radiance sheen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upraised his visage from the watery floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Guido and his kinsmen, in a band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath Rinaldo’s banner took their stand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>So one day and another prick the train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they to Paris’ leaguered gates are nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarce ten miles distant, on the banks of Seine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, as good Fortune wills it, they descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gryphon and Aquilant, the two that stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their virtuous armour with a different dye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sable was Aquilant’s, white Gryphon’s, weed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Good Olivier’s and Sigismonda’s seed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>In parley were they by a damsel stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor she of mean condition to behold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in a snowy samyte was arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vesture edged about with list of gold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Graceful and fair; although she was dismayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And down her visage tears of sorrow rolled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with such mien and act her speech enforced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seemed of some high matter she discoursed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>As Guido them, they gallant Guido knew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with the pair had been few days before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to Rinaldo; “Behold those! whom few</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In valour and in prowess go before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if they join your banner, against you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feebly will stand the squadrons of the Moor.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo vouched what valiant Guido told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“How either champion was a warrior bold.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor them he less had recognized at sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because (such was the usage of the pair)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One by a vest all black, and one all white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He knows, and by the ornaments they wear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The brethren know as well Mount Alban’s knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And give the warlike kinsmen welcome fair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They both embrace Rinaldo as a friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of their ancient quarrel make an end.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>They⁠—erst at feud and with sore-hate possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through Truffaldino<a/>⁠—(which were long to say)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each other with fraternal love carest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now putting all their enmity away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo next Sir Sansonet addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who somewhat later joined that fair array;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (knowing well his force and mighty thew)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Received the cavalier with honour due.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>When she, that gentle damsel, now more near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beholds renowned Rinaldo, him she knows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Acquainted with each paladin and peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She news which sorely grieve the warrior shows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus begin; “My lord, your cousin dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom its safety Church and Empire owes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roland, erewhile so honoured and so sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now roves the world, possest with frantic rage.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Whence woe, so direful and so strange, ensued</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cannot by me to you be signified:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I saw on earth his sword and armour strewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doffed by that peer, and scattered far and wide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I a pious knight and courteous viewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those arms collecting upon every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, in the guise of trophy, to a tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fastened that fair and pompous canoply.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“But from the trophied stem the sword withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The son of Agrican that very day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou mayst conceive what mischief may ensue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Charles and to the christened host’s array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From loss of Durindana, if anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The infidels that goodly blade should sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Good Brigliador as well, who roved, forsaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About those arms, was by the paynim taken.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Few days are past, since I in shameful wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saw Roland, running naked in his mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sending forth piteous shrieks and fearful cries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fine, that he is frantic I conclude;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this had I believed, save with these eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That strange and cruel wonder I had viewed.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She added next, how from the bridge’s top,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embraced by Rodomont, she saw him drop.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“To whosoe’er I deem not Roland’s foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I tell my tale,” (pursued the dame again,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That, of the crowd who hear this cruel woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some one, in pity to his cruel pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May strive the peer in Paris to bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or other friendly place, to purge his brain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well wot I, if such tidings he receive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nought unattempted Brandimart will leave.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Fair Flordelice was she, the stranger dame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That his own self to Brandimart more dear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in pursuit of him to Paris came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That damsel, after, tells the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“How hate and strife were blown into a flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between Gradasso and the Tartar peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Roland’s faulchion; fierce Gradasso’s prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When slain in combat Mandricardo lay.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>By accident, so strange and sad, distrust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo is distraught with ceaseless woe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He feels his heart dissolve within his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As in the sun dissolves the flake of snow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with unchanged resolve, upon the quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of good Orlando, every where will go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In hopes, if he discover him, to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some means of cure for his distempered mind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>But since his band already had he dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Did him the hand of Heaven or Fortune sway)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He first to put the Saracens to flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And raised the siege of Paris, will assay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But (for it promised vantage) he till night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The assault of their cantonments will delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till the third watch or fourth, when heavy sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their senses shall in Lethe’s water steep.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>His squadron in the wood he placed, and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ambushed, he made them lie the daylight through;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when the sun, leaving this nether air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In darkness, to his ancient nurse withdrew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fangless serpent now, and goat, and bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With other beasts, adorned the heavens anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which by the greater blaze had been concealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo moved his silent troop afield.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>A mile an-end with Aquilant he prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gryphon, Alardo, and Vivian of his race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guido and Sansonetto, and the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without word spoken, and with stealthy pace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moorish guard they find with sleep opprest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They slaughter all, nor grant one paynim grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, ere they were by others seen or heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into their midmost camp the squadron spurred.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>At the first charge on that unchristened band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their guard and sentries, taken by surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So broken are by good Rinaldo’s brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No wight is left, save he who slaughtered lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their first post forced, the paynims understand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No laughing matter is the lord’s emprize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, sleeping and dismayed, their naked swarms</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make small resistance to such warriors’ arms.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>To strike more dread into the Moorish foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mount Alban’s champion, leading the assault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bade beat his drums and bade his bugles blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with loud echoing cries his name exalt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spurs Bayardo, that is nothing slow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He clears the lofty barriers at a vault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trampling down foot, o’erturning cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scatters booth and tent in his career.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Is none so bold of all that paynimry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But what his stiffened hair stands up on end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hearing Mount Alban’s and Rinaldo’s cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From earth into the starry vault ascend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him the twin hosts of Spain and Afric fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor time in loading baggage idly spend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who will not wait that deadly fury more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to have proved so deeply irks them sore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>Guido succeeds; no less their foe pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The valiant sons of warlike Olivier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alardo, Richardet, and the other two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sansonet’s sword and horse a pathway clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well is proved upon that paynim crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The force of Vivian and of Aldigier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus each bestirs himself like valorous knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who follows Clermont’s banner to the fight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Seven hundred men with good Rinaldo speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drawn from Mount Alban and the townships nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—No fiercer erst obeyed Achilles’ lead⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enured to summer and to winter sky:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So stout each warrior is, so good at need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hundred would not from a thousand fly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, better than some famous cavaliers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many amid that squadron couch their spears.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>If good Rinaldo gathers small supplies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From rents or cities, which his rule obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So these he bound by words and courtesies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sharing what he had with his array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is none that ever from his service buys</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deserter by the bribe of better pay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Montalbano these are left in care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save pressing need demands their aid elsewhere.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Them now in succour of King Charles he stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And left with little guard his citadel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among the Africans that squadron spurred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That squadron, of whose doughty feats I tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doing by them what wolf on woolly herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Does where Galesus’ limpid waters well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or lion by the bearded goat and rank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That feeds on Cinyphus’s barbarous bank.<a/></span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Tidings to Charles Rinaldo had conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That he for Paris with his squadron steers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To assail, by night, the paynims ill purveyed;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ready and in arms the king appears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, when his help is needed, comes in aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all his peerage, and, beside his peers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brings Monodantes’ son,<a/><!--Footnote--> amid that crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Flordelice the lover chaste and true;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>Whom by such long and by such tedious way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She sought throughout the realm of France in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here by the cognizance, his old display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afar, by her distinguished from the train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the first sight of her he quits the fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wears a semblance loving and humane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He clipt her round with many a fond caress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And kissed a thousand times, or little less.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>To dame and damsel in that ancient age</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They trusted much, that, in their wandering vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roved, unescorted, many a weary stage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through foreign countries and by hill and plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom they returning hold for fair and sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor of their faith suspicion entertain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here Brandimart by Flordelice was taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“How Roland wandered, of his wits distraught.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Had he such strange and evil tidings heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From other lips, he scarce had these believed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But credited fair Flordelice’s word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From whom more wondrous things he had received,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this, as told by other, she averred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This had she seen, and ill could be deceived;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For well as any she Orlando knows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And both the when and where that damsel shows.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She tells him, “How the perilous bridge’s floor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From cavaliers king Rodomont defends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, on a pompous sepulchre, the Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His prisoners’ ravished arms and vest suspends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tells how she saw Orlando, raging sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do fearful deeds,” and her relation ends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Describing how the paynim fell reversed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his great peril, in the stream immersed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Brandimart, who the Country loves as dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As man can love a brother, friend, or son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disposed to seek Orlando, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor pain nor peril in the adventure shun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till something for the comfort of that peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By wizard’s or by leech’s art be done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed as he is, leaps lightly on his steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And takes his way beneath the lady’s lead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Thitherward were Orlando she had spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In company the knight and lady made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They daily post till to that bridge they ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Argier’s king maintained, in arms arrayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him the guard their coming signified;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Courser and arms his squires as well conveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Brandimart no sooner is at hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Rodomont is armed and at his stand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>With lofty voice the sovereign of Argier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assorting with his moody rage, ’gan say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“⁠—Whoe’er thou art, sir knight, and whencesoe’er⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brought by mistake of purpose or of way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Light from thine horse and doff thy warlike gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To deck this sepulchre, ere thee I slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An offering to its lovely tenant’s spirit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thou in thy forced homage have no merit.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Brandimart, at the paynim’s proud discourse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His weapon in the rest, for answer, laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He good Batoldo spurred, his gentle horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at the champion with such fury made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As showed that he, for courage and for force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With any warrior in the world had weighed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Rodomont as well, with rested spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thundered along the bridge, in fierce career.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The paynim’s courser, ever used to go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon that bridge’s fearful pass, where one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell prone parforce into the stream below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Securely to the fierce encounter run:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While, trembling, and irresolute in show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That other to the unwonted course is gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quivers the bridge beneath, as it would sink:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Narrow that passage is, unfenced the brink!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>With heavy spears, the growth of forest hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saplings rough-hewn, those masters of the just,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the perilous bridge encountering sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exchange, on either side, no gentle thrust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor much their mighty strength or manege-lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Avails the steeds; for, prostrate in the dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crumbles each knight and charger in mid-course;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whelmed in one fate, the rider and his horse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>When either steed would nimbly spring from ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the spur galled and gored his bleeding flank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He on that little bridge no footing found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all to narrow was the scanty plank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence both fall headlong, and the deafening sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Re-echo vaulted skies and grassy bank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So rang our stream, when from the heavenly sphere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was hurled the sun’s ill-fated charioteer.<a/><!--Footnote--></span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>With all their weight, down hurtled from the steep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Coursers and cavaliers, who sate them well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dived into the river’s darksome deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To search for beauteous nymph in secret cell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this the first nor yet the second leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from the bridge had made that infidel!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, often floundering in its oozy bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well in the soundings of that stream was read.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>He where ’tis hand and where ’tis softer knows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where shallow is the water, where profound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With breast and flanks above the waves he rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Brandimart assailed on safer ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brandimart, whirling with the current, goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While his steed’s feet the faithless bottom pound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, with his lord, stands rooted in the mud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With risk to both of drowning in the flood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Whelming them upside-down, the waters flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And plunge them in the river’s deepest bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The horse is uppermost, the knight below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the bridge looks his lady, sore bested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tear employs, and prayer, and suppliant vow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Ah, Rodomont! for love of her, whom dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye worship, do not deed of such despite!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Permit not, sir, the death of such a knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Ah! courteous lord! if e’er you loved withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have pity upon me who love this peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let it suffice that he become thy thrall!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if thou on this stone suspend his gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid whatever spoils adorn the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The best and worthiest will his spoils appear.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She ended, and her prayer so well addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It touched, though hard to move, the paynim’s breast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Moved by her words, he lent her lover aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So by his courser in the stream immersed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And largely drank, albeit with little thirst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Rodomont a while his help delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seized the warrior’s sword and helmet first.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him half exhausted from the stream he drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prisoned with that other captive crew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>All happiness was in that damsel spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When taken she her Brandimart espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although to see him captive more content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than to behold him perish in the tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None but herself she blames for the event,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thitherward had been the champion’s guide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She having to that faithful warrior shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How at the bridge Orlando she had known.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>She parts, and has anew already planned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither with good Rinaldo to resort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Guido, Sansonet of doughty hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or other cavalier of Pepin’s court;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some warrior good by water and by land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That with the Saracen will well assort.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, if no stronger than her baffled knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With better fortune may maintain the fight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>For many days the damsel vainly strayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere she encountered any one who bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Semblance of knight, that might afford her aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And free her prisoned lover from the Moor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After she long and fruitless search had made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length a warrior crost her way, that wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A richly ornamented vest, whose ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With trunks of cypresses was broidered round.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Who was that champion, shall be said elsewhere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I to Paris must return, and show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How Malagigi and Rinaldo are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Victorious o’er the routed Moorish foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To count the flyers were a useless care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or many drowned in Stygian streams below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The darkness rendered Turpin’s labour vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who tasked himself to tell the pagans slain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>King Agramant in his pavilion lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From his first sleep awakened by a knight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He that the king will be a prisoner, cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Save he with speed betake himself to flight.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch looks about him and espies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His paynim bands dispersed in panic fright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Naked, they far and near desert the field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay, never halt to snatch the covering shield.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Uncounselled and confused, the king arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His naked limbs in knightly plate and chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When thither Falsiron, the Spaniard, made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grandonio, Balugantes, and their train:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They to the Moorish king the risk displayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of being taken in that press, or slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vouched, “if thence he should in safety fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He well might thank propitious Fortune’s care.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Marsilius so, Sobrino so, their fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Express; so, one and all, the friendly band;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They warn him “that Destruction is as near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As swift Mount Alban’s lord is nigh at hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if against so fierce a cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such a troop, he seeks to make a stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He and his friends in that disastrous strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will surely forfeit liberty or life.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“But he to Arles and Narbonne may retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such few squadrons as his rule obey:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since either is well fortified, and meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warfare to maintain above one day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having saved his person, the defeat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May venge upon the foe, by this delay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His troops may rally quickly in that post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rout in fine King Charles’ conquering host.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Agramant to those lords’ opinion bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though that hard counsel he could ill endure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if supplied with wings, towards Arles he went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By roads which offered passage most secure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside safe guides, much favoured his intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His setting out, when all things were obscure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scaping the toils by good Rinaldo spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some twenty thousand of the paynims fled.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Those whom Rinaldo, whom his brethren slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom Oliviero’s sons, the valiant twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those who were slaughtered by Mount Alban’s crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—The fierce seven hundred, good Rinaldo’s train⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those whom the valiant Sansonet o’erthrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those that in their flight were drowned in Seine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He who would count, might count as well what flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zephyr and Flora shed, mid April showers.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Here one conjectures Malagigi bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A part in the alarum of that night:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that he stained the mead with paynim gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor splintered heads; but that the wizard wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Infernal angels, by his magic lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Called from Tartarean caverns into light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose many spears and banners waving wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two kingdoms such as France had scarce supplied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And with them such sonorous metal brayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many drums and martial noises sounded;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many steeds in that encounter neighed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many cries⁠—with rush of foot confounded⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rose all about, that hill, dale, wood, and glade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From distant parts, the deafening din rebounded;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And struck into the Moors such sudden dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They turned and from the field in panic fled.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Their king forgets no, how Rogero lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore wounded, and as yet in evil case.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, with what care they could, he made convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From that dread field, on horse of easy pace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Borne to the sea by the securest way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They in a bark the suffering warrior place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thence commodiously to Arles transport;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither their wasted squadrons make resort.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Chased by Rinaldo and King Charlemagne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hundred thousand, or well nigh, I ween,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By wood, by mountain, valley, and by plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flying the fury of the Franks are seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More find the passage blocked, and widely stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With crimson what before was white and green.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not so Gradasso’s puissant troops was spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who farther from the field had pitched his tent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>Nay; when he hears it is Mount Alban’s knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom assailed the paynim quarters are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He in his heart exults, with such delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he, for very joy, leaps here and there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thanks and lauds his God, who him that night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blest with so high a fortune and so rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping to win the horse without a peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bayardo, from the Christian cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>Gradasso had desired long time before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(I think you will have read the tale elsewhere)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To back that courser, which Rinaldo bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Durindana by his side to wear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with a hundred thousand men and more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To France, with this design, had made repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had erewhile to bloody fight defied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even for that good steed, Mount Alban’s pride.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>Hence had that king repaired to the sea-shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The place assigned to end their discord fell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all was marred by Malagigi’s lore;<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, cheating good Rinaldo with a spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sea the champion in a pinnace bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too tedious were the tale at length to tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence evermore Gradasso had opined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gentle baron was of craven kind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Now that Gradasso learns Mount Alban’s peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is he, that storms the camp, in huge delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed, on Alfana leaps the cavalier,<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And through the pitchy darkness seeks the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’erturning all who cross his fierce career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He leaves afflicted and in piteous plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The broken bands of Afric and of France,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All, food alike for his wide-wasting lance.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>He seeks the paladin, now here now there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Echoing his name as loud as he can shout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thitherward inclines his courser, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bodies are most thickly strown about.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length encounter, sword to sword, the pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For broken are alike their lances stout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which shivering in their hands, had flown upright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And smote the starry chariot of the Night.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>When King Gradasso recognized the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not by the blazoned bearing of his shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But by Bayardo⁠—by that horrid blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which made him seem sole champion of the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to reproach the knight was nothing slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of unworthy action him appealed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that he had not kept his ground and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile appointed for the fierce assay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Belike thou hoped,” (said he of Sericane,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“If for that time my vengeance thou couldst fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We should not meet in this wide world again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But we are met, thou seest, anew; and I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be sure, though thou shouldst seek the Stygian reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or be from earth translated to the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will hunt thee, save that courser thou forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be it through heaven above or hell below.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Dost thou, as matched with me mistrust thy force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(And that thou wert ill paired was seen whilere,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more esteemest life than fame, a course</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remains, which thee may from thy peril clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thou, if thou in peace resign the horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May’st live, if life be deemed so passing dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But live afoot, unmeriting a steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That dost by chivalry such foul misdeed.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Guido the savage, as he spake, was nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Richardetto; and the warlike twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brandished alike their trenchant swords on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To teach more wit to him of Sericane:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But them Rinaldo stopt with sudden cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor brooked that he should injury sustain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Am I too weak,” (he cried,) “without your aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To answer him that dares my deeds upbraid?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Then to the pagan thus; “Gradasso hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wilt thou listen, thou shalt understand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I will prove it manifest and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I came to seek thee out upon the strand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And afterwards on thee will made appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The truth of all I say with arms in hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Know then thou liest, if e’er with slanderous speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou taxest me with aught in knighthood’s breach.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>“But warmly I beseech thee, that before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The battle be, thou fully comprehend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My just excuses, that thou may’st no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me for my failure wrongly reprehend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next for Bayardo, as agreed of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis my desire that we afoot contend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even as ordained by thee, in desert place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone in knightly duel, face to face.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>Courteous was Sericana’s cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For generous bosoms aye such practise use)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And is content to listen to the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How he his breach of promise will excuse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him he seeks the river side, and here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In simple words what chanced Rinaldo shews:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the true history removes the veil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cites all Heaven to witness to his tale.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>Next calls upon the son of Buovo, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is of that history informed aright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now, from point to point, relates anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Nor more nor less rehearsed) the magic sleight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When thus Rinaldo; “What I warrant true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By witness, I with arms in single fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For better proof, will vouch upon thy crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both now and ever, as it likes thee best.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The king of Sericane, as loth to leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The second quarrel for the former breach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though doubtful how that tale he should receive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Takes in good part the bold Rinaldo’s speech.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not, as upon the former battle’s eve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They choose their ground on Barcellona’s beach:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But on the morn ensuing, and, fast by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A neighbouring fountain, will the question try.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Thither Rinaldo will the steed convey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There to be placed in common, ’twixt the two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If good Gradasso take his foe or slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He wins Bayardo without more ado.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if Gradasso fails in that affray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Should he be slain, or else for mercy sue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A prisoner to Mount Alban’s valiant lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo shall possess the virtuous sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>With mighty marvel and with greater pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paladin from Flordelice (as shown)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had heard how troubled was his cousin’s brain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the damsel’s lips as well had known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How he his arms had scattered on the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And heard the quarrel which from thence had grown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fine, how King Gradasso had the brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which won such thousand palms in Roland’s hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVI-->
			<p>
				<span>When they so agreed, Gradasso made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither where, camped apart, his servants lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit warmly by Rinaldo prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would with him in his pavillion stay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim king in armour was arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so the paladin, by break of day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the destined fount came either lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The field of combat for the horse and sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVII-->
			<p>
				<span>It seemed Rinaldo’s friends were all in fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dreaded much, before it was begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The issue of the fight their cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should wage against Gradasso, one to one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much force, much daring, and much skill appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that fierce king; and since of Milo’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The goodly sword was to his girdle tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All cheeks looked pale upon Rinaldo’s side;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And Malagigi more than all the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore doubted the event which would ensue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He willingly himself would have addressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To disappoint the destined fight anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But fears if he that deadly strife arrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo’s utter enmity to rue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet wroth with him upon that other score,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he conveyed the warrior from the shore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Let others nourish idle grief and fears!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo wends afield secure and gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping <em>that</em> shame, which to the knight appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too foul to be endured, to wipe away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that of Altafoglia and Poictiers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He may for ever silence the mis-say.<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Boldly, and in his heart secure to win</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That battle’s honour, wends the paladin.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CX-->
			<p>
				<span>When now from either side those warriors meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nigh at the same time at the fountain-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So in all points the pair each other greet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With countenance, so kind, so satisfied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twould seem by kindred and by friendship sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo and Gradasso were allied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But how they after closed in fierce affray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I till another season shall delay.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
