<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-18" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Gryphon is venged. Sir Mandricardo goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In search of Argier’s king. Charles wins the fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marphisa Norandino’s men o’erthrows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Due pains Martano’s cowardice requite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A favouring wind Marphisa’s gallery blows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For France with Gryphon bound and many a knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The field Medoro and Cloridano tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And find their monarch Dardinello dead.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>High minded lord! your actions evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I have with reason lauded, and still laud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though I with style inapt, and rustic lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You of large portion of your praise defraud:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, of your many virtues, one before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All others I with heart and tongue applaud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—That, if each man a gracious audience finds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No easy faith your equal judgment blinds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Often, to shield the absent one from blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I hear you this, or other, thing adduce;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or him you let, at least, an audience claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where still one ear is open to excuse:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And before dooming men to scaith and shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see and hear them ever is your use;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ere you judge another, many a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And month, and year, your sentence to delay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Had Norandine been with your care endued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What he by Gryphon did, he had not done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Profit and fame have from your rule accrued;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A stain more black than pitch he cast upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His name: through him, his people were pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And put to death by Olivero’s son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who at ten cuts or thrusts, in fury made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some thirty dead about the waggon laid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whither fear drives, in rout, the others all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some scattered here, some there, on every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fill road and field; to gain the city-wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some strive, and smothered in the mighty tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One on another, in the gateway fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gryphon, all thought of pity laid aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threats not nor speaks, but whirls his sword about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well venging on the crowd their every flout.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of those who to the portal foremost fleed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The readiest of the crowd their feet to ply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Part, more intent upon their proper need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than their friends’ peril, raise the drawbridge high:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Part, weeping and with deathlike visage, speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor turn their eyes behind them as they fly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While, through the ample city, outcry loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And noise, and tumult rises from the crowd.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Two nimble Gryphon seizes, mid the train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When to their woe the bridge is raised; of one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the field the warrior strews the brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he beats out on a hard grinding stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seized by the breast, the other of the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Over the city-wall by him is thrown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fear chills the townsmen’s marrow, when they spy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The luckless wretch descending from the sky.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Many there were who feared in their alarms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest o’er the wall Sir Gryphon would have vaulted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor greater panic seized upon those swarms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than if the sultan had the town assaulted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sound of running up and down, of arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of cry of Muezzins, on high exalted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of drums and trumpets, heaven, ’twould seem, rebounded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that the world was by the noise confounded.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But I will to another time delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What chanced on this occasion, to recount.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis meet I follow Charles upon his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hurrying in search of furious Rodomont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who did the monarch’s suffering people slay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I said, with him, the danger to affront,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Went Namus, Oliver, the Danish peer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-225" id="noteref-225" epub:type="noteref">225</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Avino, Avolio, Otho and Berlinghier.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Eight lances’ shock, that eight such warriors guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which all at once against the king they rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Endured the stout and scaly serpent’s hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In which the cruel Moor his limbs had drest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As a barque rights itself⁠—the sheet untied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which held its sail⁠—by growing wind opprest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So speedily Sir Rodomont arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though a hill had been uprooted by the blows.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rainier and Guido, Richard, Salomon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ivan, Ughetto, Turpin, and the twain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angiolin, Angelier⁠—false Ganellon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Mark and Matthew from <abbr>St.</abbr> Michael’s plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the eight of whom I spake, all set upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The foe, with Edward and Sir Arimane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who leading succours from the English shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had lodged them in the town short time before.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not so, well-keyed into the solid stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Groans upon Alpine height the castle good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When by rude Boreas’ rage or Eurus’ strown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uptorn are ash and fir in mountain-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As groans Sir Rodomont, with pride o’erblown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflamed with anger and with thirst of blood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as the thunder and the lightning’s fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fly coupled, such his vengeance and his ire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He at <em>his</em> head took aim who stood most nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ughetto was the miserable wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom to the teeth he clove, and left to die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though of good temper was his helmet bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well the others many strokes let fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At him, himself; which all the warrior smite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But harm (so hard the dragon’s hide) no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than needle can the solid anvil score.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All the defences, round, abandoned are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The unpeopled city is abandoned all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, where the danger is the greater, there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The many give their aid, at Charles’ call:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through every street they hurry to the square,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since flying nought avails, from work and wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their bosoms so the monarch’s presence warms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That each again takes courage, each takes arms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As when within the closely-fastened cage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of an old lioness, well used to fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An untamed bull is prisoned, to engage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The savage monster, for the mob’s delight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cubs, who see him cresting in his rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And round the den loud-bellowing, to the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the huge beast’s enormous horns unused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cower at a distance, timid and confused;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But if the mother spring at him, and hang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fixing her cruel tusks into his ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her whelps as well will blood their greedy fang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, bold in her defence, assail the steer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One bites his paunch, and one his back: so sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That band upon the paynim cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From roof and window, and from place more nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poured in a ceaseless shower, the weapons fly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of cavaliers and footmen such the squeeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hardly can the place the press contain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They cluster there as thick as swarming bees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thither from each passage troop amain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that, were they unarmed, and with more ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than stalks or turnips he could cleave the train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill Rodomont in twenty days would clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gathering crowd, united far and near.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Unknowing how himself from thence to free,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-226" id="noteref-226" epub:type="noteref">226</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim by this game is angered sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who little thins the gathering rabblery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Staining the ground with thousands slain or more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the while, in his extremity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Finds that his breath comes thicker than before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sees he cannot pierce the hostile round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless he thence escape while strong and sound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The monarch rolls about his horrid eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sees that foes all outlets barricade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, at the cost of countless enemies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A path shall quickly by his hand be made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Fury calls him, lo! the felon hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And brandishes on high his trenchant blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To assail the newly entered British band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Edward and Sir Ariman command.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He who has seen the fence, in well-thronged square,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Against whose stakes the eddying crowd is born)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By wild bull broken, that has had to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the long day, dogs, blows, and ceaseless scorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who hunts the scattered people here and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this, or that, now hoists upon his horn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let him as such, or fiercer yet, account,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he breaks forth, the cruel Rodomont.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At one cross-blow fifteen or twenty foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hews, as many leaves without a bead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At cross or downright-stroke; as if he rows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trashes in vineyard or in willow-bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At last all smeared with blood the paynim goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Safe from the place, which he has heaped with dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wheresoe’er he turns his steps, are left</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heads, arms, and other members, maimed and cleft.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He from the square retires in such a mode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None can perceive that danger him appals;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, during this, what were the safest road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which to sally, he to thought recals.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He comes at last to where the river flowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Below the isle, and past without the walls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In daring men at arms and mob increase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who press him sore, nor let him part in peace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As the high-couraged beast, whom hunters start</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the wild Nomade or Massilian chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, even in flying, shows his noble heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And threatening seeks his lair with sluggish pace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From that strange wood of sword, and spear, and dart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turns Rodomont, with action nothing base;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still impeded by the galling foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes for the river with long steps and slow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He turned upon the rabble-rout who bayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind him, thrice or more, by anger driven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stained anew his falchion, by whose blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than a hundred deadly wounds were given.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But reason, finally, his fury stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the bloody carnage stank to heaven;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-227" id="noteref-227" epub:type="noteref">227</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, with better counsel, from the side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast himself down into Seine’s foaming tide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Athwart the current swam, with arms and all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if by corks upborn, the cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though thou Antaeus bred’st, and Hannibal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O Africa! thou never bred’st his peer!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When now across the stream, without the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He turned, and saw the royal town appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—To have traversed all the city moved his ire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving it undestroyed by sword or fire;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And him so sorely anger stung and pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither he thought a second time to go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from his inmost bosom groaned and sighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would depart until he laid it low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he saw one along the river-side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approach, who made him rage and hate forego;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strait shall you hear who ’twas, approached the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first I have to say of other thing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have of haughty Discord now to say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom the archangel Michael gave command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To heat to enmity and fierce affray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The best of Agramant’s besieging band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She went that evening from the abbey gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her task committing to another’s hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Left it to Fraud to feed, till her return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The war, and make the fires she kindled burn;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And she believed, that she with greater power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should go, did Pride with her as well repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she (for all were guested in one bower)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In search of her had little way to fare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pride went with her; but, that in hall or tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A vicar too her charge might duly bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She for those days she absent thought to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For her lieutenant left Hypocrisy.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-228" id="noteref-228" epub:type="noteref">228</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The implacable Discord went, and with the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Companion of the enterprise, was Pride)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon her road; and found that, by the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was journeying to the paynim camp, beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Comfortless Jealousy, with whom there came</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A little dwarf, attending as a guide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who erst had been sent forward with advice</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Sarza’s king, by beauteous Doralice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When she fell into Mandricardo’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(I have before recounted when and where)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She had in secret given the dwarf command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to the king should with the tidings fare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom she hoped not vainly would be scanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tale her messenger was charged to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But wonderous deeds be done for her relief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sad and signal vengeance on the thief.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Jealousy had that little dwarf espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And kenned the reason of his mission too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And joined him, journeying with him side by side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming that she therein a part might do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discord, with pleasure, Jealousy decried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with more joy, when she the occasion knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which thither brought the dame, who much (she wist)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might in the task she had in hand assist.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of means to embroil the Sarzan and the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Agrican,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-229" id="noteref-229" epub:type="noteref">229</a> she deems herself possest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A certain mode to enrage these two is won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other means may work upon the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She thither with the dwarfish page is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the fierce Pagan in his clutch had prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proud Paris; and they reached the river-strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exactly as the felon swam to land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As soon as the redoubted Rodomont</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knew in the dwarf the courier of his dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He all his rage extinguished, cleared his front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And felt his courage brighten into flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All else he deems the courier may recount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save that a wight had wrought him scaith and shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cries (encountering him with cheerful brow)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“How fares our lady? wither sent art thou?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nor mine nor thine that lady will I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who is another’s thrall,” the dwarf replied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“We, on our road, encountered yesterday</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A knight, who seized and bore away the bride.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Jealousy, upon this, took up the play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, cold as asp, embraced the king: her guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursued his tale, relating how the train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their mistress taken, by one man were slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her flint and steel, fell Discord, as he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Took forth, and somewhile hammered on the stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pride, underneath, the ready tinder spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the quick fire was in a moment blown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This on the paynim’s soul so fiercely fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He could not find a resting place: ’mid groan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sob he storms, with horrid face and eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which threat the elements and ample sky.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As tiger rages, who in vain descends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into her den, and finds herself alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, circling all the cavern, comprehends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At last, that her beloved young are gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To ire, to rage like hers his wrath extends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor night the king regards, nor rock, nor stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor stream:⁠—Nor length of way nor storm arrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The speed with which he on the plunderer prest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So raging, to the pygmy dwarf who bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The news, exclaimed the king, “Now hence away!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor horse he waits, nor carriage, nor, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Departing, deigns to <em>his</em> a word to say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hurries with such speed, that not with more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lizard darts at noon across the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Horse had he none, but be he whose he might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would make his own the first which came in sight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Discord at this, who read his secret thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaimed, as she looked smilingly on Pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Through her he to a courser should be brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which new cause of strife should be supplied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, that by him no other might be caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She from his path would keep all steeds beside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knew already where the prize to seek.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—But her I leave, again of Charles to speak.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When, on the Saracen’s departure, spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About King Charles, was the consuming flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He ranged his troops anew: some warriors went</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To strengthen feeble posts which succours claim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest against the Saracens are sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To give the foe checkmate and end the game;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from Saint German’s to Saint Victor’s gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He pours the host, which on his signal waits.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He these at Saint Marcellus’ gate, where lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outstretched a large circumference of plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bade one another wait, in one array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To reunite against the paynim train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflaming every one to smite and slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In guise, that for a record should remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He made the various troops fall in below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their banners, and the battle-signal blow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Agramant has remounted in his sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While this is doing in his foe’s despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the stripling<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-230" id="noteref-230" epub:type="noteref">230</a> who loved Isabel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is waging perilous and fearful fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lurcanio with Sobrino strives as well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo a troop encounters, whom the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Valour and with Fortune for his guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charges, and breaks, and routs on every side.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While so the battle stands, king Charlemagne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Falls on the rear guard of the paynim foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where bold Marsilius halts the flower of Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And forms the host, his royal flag below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On these king Charlemagne impels his train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, foot with horse to flank, against them go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While so the deafening drum and trumpet sounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twould seem the spacious world the din rebounds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Saracenic squadrons had begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bend, and all the army of the Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had turned, disordered, broken, and undone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never to be arrayed or rallied more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that Grandonio stood, and Falsiron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tried oftentimes in greater ill before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Serpentine and Balugantes proud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the renowned Ferraù, who cried aloud:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O valiant men,” he⁠—“O companions,” cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“O brethren, stand, and yet your place maintain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like cobweb-threads our cruel enemies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will find their works, if we our part sustain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What this day Fortune offers to our eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If now we conquer, see the praise, the gain!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If conquered, see the utter loss and shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which will for ever wait upon your name!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He in this time a mighty lance had spanned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And spurred at once against Sir Berlinghier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who Argaliffa guided with his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And broke his helmet’s frontal with the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast him on earth, and with the cruel brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unhorsed perhaps eight other warriors near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His mighty strokes discharging, at each blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He ever laid at least one horseman low.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In other part, Rinaldo, in his mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has slain more enemies than I can say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the warlike knight no order stood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You might have seen the ample camp give way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less Zerbino and Lurcanio good</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do deeds, which will be told in every day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><em>This</em>, with a thrust, has bold Balastro slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><em>That</em> Finaduro’s helm has cleft in twain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The first was of the Alzerban army head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ruled by Tardocco some short time before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other one the valiant squadrons led</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Saphi, and Morocco, and Zamor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Where, ’mid the paynims,” might to me be said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Is knight whose sword can cleave or lance can gore?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But step by step I go, and as I wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My way, leave none who merits praise behind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Zumara’s king is not forgotten here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dardinel, who Sir Dulphin of the mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Claude of the wood, and Hubert, with the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Of Mirford he) and Elio did dismount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with the faulchion, Stamford’s cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Anselm, Raymond and Sir Pinnamont</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From London-town; though valiant were the twain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two stunned, one wounded, the four others slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet will his squadron not so firmly stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Maugre the valour which his deeds display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So firmly, as to wait the Christian band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In number less, but steadier in array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More used to joust and manage of the brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all things appertaining to the fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Setta and Morocco turned, and seized, with dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zumara and Canaries’ islesmen fled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But faster than the rest Alzerba flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom Dardinel opposed, and now with sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reproach, and now with prayer he moves, and tries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What best he deems their courage may restore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“If good Almontes has deserved,” he cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That you should by his memory set such store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now shall be seen⁠—be seen, if you will me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His son, abandon in such jeopardy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For sake of my green youth, I pray you stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That youth whereon your hopes were wont to feed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And suffer not that, scattered by the brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Africa be lost our noble seed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save you united go, be sure the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is shut against you, wheresoe’er you speed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too high a wall to climb is mountain-steep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The yawning sea a ditch too wide to leap.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Far better ’tis to perish than to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Torn by these dogs, or lie at their control.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since vain is every other remedy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wait, friends, for love of Heaven, the advancing shoal:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They are not gifted with more lives than we;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have but one pair of hands, have but one soul.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So saying, the bold youth, amid the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of enemies, the Earl of Huntley slew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Almontes’ memory, through the Moorish bands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes every bosom with such ardour glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They deem ’tis better to use arms and hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fight, than turn their backs upon the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Taller than all William of Burnwich stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An Englishman, whom Dardinel brings low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And equals with the rest; then smites upon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cleaves, the head of Cornish Aramon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Down fell this Aramon, and to afford</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him succour, thitherward his brother made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But from the shoulder him Zumara’s lord<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-231" id="noteref-231" epub:type="noteref">231</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cleft to the fork, with his descending blade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next Bogio de Vergalla’s belly gored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from his debt absolved (the forfeit paid)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to return within six months, if life</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were granted him, had promised to his wife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lurcanio next met Dardinello’s eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He upon earth Dorchino had laid low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pierced through the throat, and hapless Gardo nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cleft to the teeth; at him, as all too slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from Altheus vainly seeks to fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom as his heart Lurcanio loves, a blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his head behind the Scotchman speeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, slaughtered by the stroke, the warrior bleeds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dardinel, to avenge him, took a spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, should he lay the fierce Lurcanio dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vowed to his Mahomet, if he could hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mosque should have his empty arms; this said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ranging the field in haste, that cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He in the flank, with thrust so full and dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encountered, that it went through either side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he to his to strip the baron cried.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From me it sure were needless to demand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If Ariodantes, when his brother fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was grieved; if he with his avenging hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among the damned would send Sir Dardinell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all access the circling troops withstand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bar, no less baptised than infidel:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet would he venge himself, and with his blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now here, now there, an open passage made.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He charges, chases, breaks, and overthrows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whoever cross him on the crowded plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Dardinello, who his object knows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would fain the wish content; but him the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impedes as well, which round about him flows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And renders aye his every purpose vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If one on all sides thins the Moorish rank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other slays Scot, Englishman, and Frank.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fortune still blocked their path throughout the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that they met not, ’mid that chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And kept one as a mightier champion’s prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For rarely man escapes his destiny.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold the good Rinaldo turns that way!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, for this one no refuge there might be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! good Rinaldo comes: him Fortune guides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for his sword King Dardinel provides.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But here enough for this one while is shown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of their illustrious doings in the west;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis time I seek Sir Gryphon, and make known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How he, with fury burning in his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That rabble-rout had broke and overthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Struck with more fear than ever men possest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither speeds Norandine on that alarm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for his guard above a thousand arm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>King Norandine, girt with peer and knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing on every side the people fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rides to the gates, with squadron duly dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at his hest the portals open fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile Sir Gryphon, having put to flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The weak and worthless rabble far and nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The scorned arms (to keep him from that train),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such as they were, took up and donned again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And nigh a temple strongly walled, and round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose base a moat for its protection goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon a little bridge takes up his ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That him his enemies may not enclose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! loudly shouting, and with threatening sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mighty squadron through the gateway flows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The valiant Gryphon changes not his place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shows how small his fear by act and face.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when, approaching near, he saw the band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sallied forth to meet them by the way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wielding still his sword in either hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made cruel havoc in the close array.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then on the narrow bridge resumed his stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor there his hunters only held at bay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anew he sallied, and returned anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye leaving bloody signs when he withdrew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forestroke and back he deals, and on the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Horsemen and foot o’erthrows on every side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while the ample mob the knight surround,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more and more the warfare rages wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length Sir Gryphon fears he shall be drowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So waxed their numbers) in the increasing tide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hurt in the left shoulder, through his mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thigh, his wind as well begins to fail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Valour, who so oft befriends her own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes him find grace in Norandino’s eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, while alarmed, he hurries there, o’erthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many men, such heaps of dead espies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While he views wounds, which Hector’s hand alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He weens could deal⁠—to him all testifies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he had put an undeserved shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon a cavalier of mighty name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next seeing him more near, whose falchion’s sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had dealt such deaths amid his chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And raised about himself that horrid heap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stained the water with that bloody dye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thought that he beheld Horatius keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Singly, the bridge against all Tuscany;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vext, and anxious to remove the stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Recalled his men, and that with little pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, lifting his bare hand, in sign affied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From ancient times, of treaty and of truce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Repenting him, he to Sir Gryphon cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“It grieves me sorely, and I cannot choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But own my sin: let counsels which misguide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And my own little wit, such fault excuse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What by the vilest knight I thought to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I to the best on earth have done in you.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And though the bitter injuries and shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That have to thee through ignorance been done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are equalled, and all cancelled by thy fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And merged, in truth, in glory thou hast won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whatever satisfaction thou canst claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within my power or knowledge, count upon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When I know how atonement may be made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By city, castle, or by money paid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Demand of me this kingdom’s moiety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from this day thou its possessor art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since not alone thy worth deserves this fee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But merits, I with this should give my heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, pledge of faith and lasting love, to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the meanwhile, thy friendly hand impart.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So saying, from his horse the king descended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And towards Gryphon his right-hand extended.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When he beheld the monarch’s altered cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who bent to clasp his neck, towards him paced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His sword and rancour laid aside, the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him humbly underneath the hips embraced.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-232" id="noteref-232" epub:type="noteref">232</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Norandine, who saw the sanguine smear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his two wounds, bade seek a leech in haste;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bade them softly with the knight resort</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the town, and lodge him in his court.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here, wounded, he remained some days before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He could bear arms: but him, in the design</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of seeking out Sir Aquilant once more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And good Astolpho, left in Palestine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I quit; they vainly did his path explore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After Sir Gryphon left the holy shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through Solyma in every place of note,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many, from the Holy Land remote.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One and the other are alike to seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the inquiry where the knight may use;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But they encounter with the pilgrim-Greek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who of false Origilla gives them news;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Relating, as of her he haps to speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That towards Antioch she her way pursues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By a new leman of that city charmed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who her with fierce and sudden flame had warmed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Aquilant asked him, if he had possest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Gryphon of the news to them conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, hearing that he <em>had</em>, surmised the rest⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he was gone, and by what motive swayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He followed Origille, was manifest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had in quest of her for Antioch made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take her from his rival, and with view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On him some memorable scathe to do.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Aquilant brooked not Gryphon such a feat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without him, and alone, should thus assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And took his armour and pursued his beat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first besought the duke he would delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To visit France and his paternal seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he from Antioch measured back his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At Joppa he embarks, who deems by sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The better and securer way to be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From the south-east upsprung so strong a breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And which for Gryphon’s galley blew so right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the third day he Tyre’s famed city sees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lesser Joppa quick succeeds to sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Zibellotto and Baruti flees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Cyprus to larboard left) the galley light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Tripoli to Tortosa shapes her way,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-233" id="noteref-233" epub:type="noteref">233</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so to Lizza and Lajazzo’s bay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From thence, towards the east the pilot veered</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her ready tiller, prompt his course to scan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And straightway for the wide Orontes steered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And watched his time, and for the harbour ran.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aquilant, when his bark the margin neared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bade lower the bridge, and issued, horse and man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It armour, and along the river wended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up-stream, till he his way at Antioch ended.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To inform himself of that Martano bent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And heard that he to Antioch was addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Origilla, where a tournament</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was to be solemnized by royal hest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To track whom Aquilant was so intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assured that Gryphon had pursued his quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He Antioch left again that very day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not by sea again would take his way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He towards Lidia and Larissa goes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-234" id="noteref-234" epub:type="noteref">234</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—At rich Aleppo makes a longer stay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God, to make plain that he, even here, bestows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On evil and on good their fitting pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At a league’s distance from Mamuga, throws</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Martano in the avenging brother’s way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Martano travelling with the tourney’s prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Displayed before his horse in showy wise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sir Aquilant believed, at the first show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His brother he in vile Martano spied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For arms and vest, more white than virgin snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The coward in the warrior’s sight belied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sprang towards him, with that joyful “Oh!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which delight is ever signified;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But changed his look and tone, when, nearer brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sees that he is not the wight he sought:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And through that evil woman’s treachery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deemed Gryphon murdered by the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, “Tell me,” he exclaimed, “thou, who must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Traitor and thief⁠—both written in thy cheer⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence are these arms? and wherefore do I thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">View on the courser of my brother dear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say is my brother slaughtered or alive?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How didst thou him of horse and arms deprive?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Origilla hears him, in affright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She turns her palfrey, and for flight prepares:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Aquilant, more quick, in her despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrests the traitress, ere she further fares.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the loud threats of that all furious knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom he so was taken unawares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Martan’ turns pale and trembles like a leaf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor how to act or answer knows the thief.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Aquilant thundered still, and, to his dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A falchion, pointed at his gullet, shewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And swore with angry menaces, the head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From him and Origille should be hewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save in all points the very truth be said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Awhile on this ill-starred Martano chewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Revolving still what pretext he might try</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To lessen his grave fault, then made reply:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Know, sir, you see my sister in this dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one of good and virtuous parents born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though she has lately led a life of shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And been by Gryphon foully brought to scorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for I loathed such blot upon our name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet weened that she could ill by force be torn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From such a puissant wight, I laid a scheme</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her by address and cunning to redeem.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“With her I planned the means, who in her breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nursed the desire a better life to prove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she, when Gryphon was retired to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In silence from the warrior should remove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This done: lest he should follow on our quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so undo the web we vainly wove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him we deprived of horse and arm, and we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are hither come together, as you see.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His cunning might have proved of good avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Aquilant believed him easily;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, save in taking Gryphon’s horse and mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to the knight had done no injury;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that he wrought so high the specious tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As manifested plainly, ’twas a lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all ’twas perfect, save that he the dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had for his sister vouched with whom he came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Aquilant had in Antioch chanced to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She was his concubine⁠—well certified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of this by many⁠—and in furious glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaimed; “Thou falsest robber, thou hast lied!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dealt, with that, the recreant such a blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He drove two grinders down his throat; then tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Not sought Martano with his foe to cope)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The caitiff’s arms behind him with a rope.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, though she for excuse tried many wiles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did thus as well by Origille untrue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And till he reached Damascus’ lofty piles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Them by town, street, or farm, behind him drew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And will a thousand times a thousand miles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sorrow and with suffering, drag the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he his brother find; who, at his pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May vengeance to the guilty couple measure.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sir Aquilant made squires and beasts as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return with him, and to Damascus came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And heard Renown, throughout the city, swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plying her ample wings, Sir Gryphon’s name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here, great and little⁠—every one, could tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas he that in the tourney won such fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had, by one that ill deserved his trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Been cheated of the honours of the just.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Pointing him out to one another’s sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hostile people all Martano bayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“And is not this (they cried) that ribald wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in another’s spoils himself arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who the valour of a sleeping knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his own shame and infamy o’erlaid?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this the woman of ungrateful mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who aids the wicked and betrays the good?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Others exclaimed, “How fittingly combined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marked with one stamp, and of one race are they!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some loudly cursed them, and some raved behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While others shouted, “Hang, burn, quarter, slay!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The throng to view them prest, with fury blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the square before them made its way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch of the tidings was advised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these above another kingdom prized.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Attended with few squires the Syrian king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As then he chanced to be, came forth with speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with Sir Aquilant encountering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who Gryphon had avenged with worthy deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him honoured with fair cheer, and home would bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in his palace lodged, as fitting meed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having the prisoned pair, with his consent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First in the bottom of a turret pent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thither they go, where Gryphon from his bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has not as yet, since he was wounded, stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who at his brother’s coming waxes red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surmising well he of his case has heard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And after Aquilant his say had said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him somedeal reproached, the three conferred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to what penance to the wicked two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So fallen into their hands, was justly due.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis Aquilant’s, ’tis Norandino’s will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand tortures shall their guerdon be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Gryphon, who the dame <em>alone</em> can ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Excuse, entreats for <em>both</em> impunity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many matters urges with much skill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But well is answered; and ’tis ruled, to flea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Martano’s body with the hangman’s scourge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And only short of death his penance urge.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bound is the wretch, but not ’mid grass and flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose limbs beneath the hangman’s lashes burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All the next morn: they prison in the tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Origilla, till Lucina shall return;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom the counselling lords reserve the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To speak the woman’s sentence, mild or stern.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Harboured, till Gryphon can bear arms, at court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aquilant fleets the time in fair disport.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The valiant Norandino could not choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Made by such error temperate and wise),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But full of penitence and sorrow, muse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With downcast spirit, and in mournful guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On having bid his men a knight misuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom all should worthily reward and prize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that he, night and morning, in his thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How to content the injured warrior sought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And he determined, in the public sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’ the city, guilty of that injury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all such honour as to perfect knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could by a puissant monarch rendered be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him with the glorious guerdon to requite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had been ravished by such treachery:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence, within a month, proclaimed the intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hold another solemn tournament.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For which he made what stately preparation</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was possible to make by sceptered king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence Fame divulged the royal proclamation</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout all Syria’s land, with nimble wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Phoenicia and Palestine; till the relation</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of this in good Astolpho’s ears did ring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, with the lord who ruled that land in trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved he would be present at the just.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For a renowned and valiant cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has the true history vaunted, Sansonnet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Roland christened, Charles (I said), the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Over the Holy Land as ruler set:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with the duke<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-235" id="noteref-235" epub:type="noteref">235</a> takes up his load, to steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, where Rumour speaks the champions met.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that his ears, on all sides in the journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are filled with tidings of Damascus’ tourney.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thither the twain their way those countries through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By easy stages and by slow, addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That fresh upon the day of joust the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might in Damascus-town set up their rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When at the meeting of cross-ways they view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A person, who, in movement and in vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appears to be a man, but is a maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And marvellously fierce, in martial raid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa was the warlike virgin’s name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such her worth, she oft with naked brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had pressed Orlando sore in martial game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him who had Mount Alban in command;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-236" id="noteref-236" epub:type="noteref">236</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ever, night and day, the armed dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scowered, here and there, by hill and plain, the land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping with errant cavalier to meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And win immortal fame by glorious feat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Sansonnetto and the English knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She sees approaching her, in warlike weed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who seem two valiant warriors in her sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As of large bone, and nerved for doughty deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On them she fain would prove her martial might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to defy the pair has moved her steed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, eyeing the two warriors, now more near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa recognized the duke and peer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His pleasing ways she did in mind retrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When arms in far Catày with her he bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Called him by name, nor would in iron case;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Retain her hand, upraised the casque she wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him, advanced, to meet with glad embrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though, of all living dames and those of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The proudest, she; nor with less courteous mien</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paladin salutes the martial queen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They questioned one another of their way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when the duke has said (who first replied)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That he Damascus seeks, where to assay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their virtuous deeds, all knights of valour tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Syrian king invites, in martial play,”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bold Marphisa, at his hearing, cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Ever to prove her warlike prowess bent)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I will be with you at this tournament.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To have such a comrade either cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is much rejoiced. They to Damascus go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in a suburb, of the city clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are lodged, upon the day before the show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, till her aged lover, once so dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aurora roused, their humble roof below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In greater ease the weary warriors rested</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than had they been in costly palace guested.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when the clear and lucid sun again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its shining glories all abroad had spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauteous lady armed, and warriors twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having first couriers to the city sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, when ’twas time, reported to the train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, to see truncheons split in contest dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Norandine had come into the square</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In which the cruel games appointed were.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Straight to the city ride the martial band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, through the high-street, to the crowded place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, waiting for the royal signal, stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ranged here and there, the knights of gentle race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The guerdons destined to the conqueror’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that day’s tourney, were a tuck and mace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Richly adorned, and, with them, such a steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to the winning lord were fitting meed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Norandine, sure that, in the martial game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both prizes destined for the conquering knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well as one and the other tourney’s fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must be obtained by Gryphon, named the white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To give him all that valiant man could claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor could he give the warrior less, with right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The armour, guerdon of this final course</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Placed with the tuck and mace and noble horse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The arms which in the former joust the due</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of valiant Gryphon were, who all had gained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(With evil profit, by the wretch untrue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Martan’ usurped, who Gryphon’s bearing feigned,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be hung up on high in public view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the rich-flourished tuck, the king ordained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fastened at the saddle of the steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mace, that Gryphon might win either meed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But from effecting what he had intended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He was prevented by the warlike maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who late into the crowded square had wended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Sansonnet and England’s duke arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing the arms of which I spoke suspended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She straight agnized the harness she surveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Once hers, and dear to her; as matters are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteemed by us as excellent and rare;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Though, as a hindrance, she upon the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had left the arms, when, to retrieve her sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She from her shoulders slipt the ponderous load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And chased Brunello, worthy of the cord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More to relate were labour ill bestowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I deem, nor further of the tale record.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-237" id="noteref-237" epub:type="noteref">237</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enough for me, by you ’tis understood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How here she found anew her armour good.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>You shall take with you, when by manifest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And certain tokens they by her were known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, for no earthly thing, the iron vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And weapons for a day would have foregone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She thinks not if this mode or that be best</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To have them, anxious to regain her own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But t’wards the arms with hand extended hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And without more regard takes down the prize.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And throwing some on earth, it chanced that more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than was her own she in her hurry took.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Syrian king, who was offended sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raised war against her with a single look.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ill the wrong his angered people bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, to avenge him, lance and falchion shook;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remembering not, on other day, how dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They paid for scathing errant cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No wishful child more joyfully, ’mid all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flowers of springtide, yellow, blue, and red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Finds itself, nor at concert or at ball</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dame beauteous and adorned, than ’mid the tread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of warlike steeds, and din of arms, and fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of darts, and push of spears⁠—where blood is shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And death is dealt, in the tumultuous throng⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><b>She</b> finds herself beyond all credence strong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spurred her courser, and with lance in rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Imperious at the foolish rabble made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And⁠—through the neck impaled or through the breast⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some pierced, some prostrate at the encounter layed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next this or that she with the falchion prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The head from one she severed with the blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from that other cleft: another sank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Short of right arm or left, or pierced in flank.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bold Sansonnetto and Astolpho near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had, with her, their limbs in harness dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though they for other end in arms appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing the maid and crowd engaged in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First lower the helmet’s vizor, next the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with their lances charge the mob outright:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then bare their falchions, and, amid the crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A passage with the trenchant weapons hew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The errant cavaliers who to that stage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To joust, from different lands had made resort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing them warfare with such fury wage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And into mourning changed the expected sport,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because all knew not what had moved the rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the infuriate people in that sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor what the insult offered to the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suspended stood in doubt and wondering.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of <em>these</em>, some will the crowded rabble’s band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Too late repentant of the feat) befriend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><em>Those</em>, favouring not the natives of the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than the foreigners, to part them wend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Others more wary, with their reins in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sit watching how the mischief is to end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gryphon and Aquilant are of the throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which hurry forward to avenge the wrong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The pair of warlike brethren witnessing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch’s drunken eyes with venom fraught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having heard from many in the ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The occasion which the furious strife had wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself no whit less injured than the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Syria’s land, offended Gryphon thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each knight, in haste, supplied himself with spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thundering vengeance drove in full career.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On Rabican, pricked forth before his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Valiant Astolpho, from the other bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the enchanted lance of gold in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which at the first encounter bore to ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What knights he smote with it; and on the sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laid Gryphon first; next Aquilant he found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scarcely touched the border of his shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere he reversed the warrior on the field.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From lofty saddle Sansonnet o’erthrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Famous for price and prowess, many a knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the outlet of the square the mob withdrew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch raged with anger and despite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile, of the first cuirass and the new</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Possest, as well as either helmet bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa, when she all in flight discerned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conqueror towards her suburb-inn returned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sansonnet and Astolpho are not slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In following t’wards the gate the martial maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(The mob dividing all to let them go)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And halt when they have reached the barricade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gryphon and Aquilant, who saw with woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Themselves on earth at one encounter laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their drooping heads, opprest with shame, decline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor dare appear before King Norandine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Seizing their steeds and mounting, either son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Oliver to seek their foemen went:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With many of his vassals too is gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king; on death or vengeance all intent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The foolish rabble cry, “Lay on, lay on.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stand at distance and await the event.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gryphon arrived where the three friends had gained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A bridge, and facing round the post maintained.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He, at the first approach, Astolpho knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For still the same device had been his wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even from the day he charmed Orrilo slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His horse, his arms the same: him not with care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Gryphon had remarked, nor steadfast view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When late he jousted with him in the square:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He knows him here and greets; next prays him show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who the companions are that with him go;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And why they had those arms, without the fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Syria’s king, pulled down, and to his slight.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his champions England’s cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Gryphon courteously informed aright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“But little of those arms, pursued the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He knew, which were the occasion of the fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But (for he thither with Marphisa came</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Sansonnet) had armed to aid the dame.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While he and Gryphon stood in colloquy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aquilant came, and knew Astolpho good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he heard speaking with his brother nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, though of evil purpose, changed his mood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Norandine’s trooped many, these to spy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But came not nigh the warriors where they stood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seeing them in conference, stood clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Listening, in silence, and intent to hear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some one who hears Marphisa hold is there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Famed, through the world, for matchless bravery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His courser turns, and bids the king have care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save he would lose his Syrian chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To snatch his court, before all slaughtered are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the hand of Death and of Tisiphone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that ’twas verily Marphisa, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had borne away the arms in public view.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As Norandine is told that name of dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the Levant so feared on every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose mention made the hair on many a head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bristle, though she was often distant wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fears the ill may happen which is said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless against the mischief he provide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence his meiny, who have changed their ire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already into fear, he bids retire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sons of Oliver, on the other hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Sansonnetto and the English knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So supplicate Marphisa, she her brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Puts up, and terminates the cruel fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the monarch next, amid his brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cries, proudly, “Sir, I know not by what right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou wouldst this armour, not thine own, present</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him who conquers in thy tournament.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Mine are these arms, which I, upon a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left on the road which leads from Armeny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because, parforce afoot, I sought to stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A robber, who had sore offended me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The truth of this my ensign may display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which here is seen, if it be known to thee.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that she on the plate which sheathed the breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Cleft in three places) showed a crown imprest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“To me this an Armenian merchant gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis true,” replied the king, “some days ago;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had you raised your voice, the arms to crave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You should have had them, whether yours or no.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, notwithstanding I to Gryphon gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The armour, I so well his nature know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He freely would resign the gift he earned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it by me to you might be returned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Your allegation needs not to persuade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These arms are yours⁠—that they your impress bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your word suffices me, by me more weighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than all that other witness could declare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To grant them yours is but a tribute paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Virtue, worthy better prize to wear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now have the arms, and let us make accord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let some fairer gift the knight reward.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gryphon, who little had those arms at heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But much to satisfy the king was bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Replied: “You recompense enough impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Teaching me how your wishes to content.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Here is my honour all at sake,” apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Me seemeth,” said Marphisa, and forewent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her claim for Gryphon’s sake, with courteous cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as his gift, in fine received the gear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the city, their rejoicings to renew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In love and peace they measured back their way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next came the joust, of which the honour due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prize was Sansonnet’s; since from the fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abstained Astolpho and the brethren two,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-238" id="noteref-238" epub:type="noteref">238</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bold Marphisa, best of that array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like faithful friends and good companions; fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Sansonnet the tourney’s meed should gain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Eight days or ten in joy and triumph dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knights with Norandine; but with such strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desire of France the warriors’ bosoms swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which will not let them thence be absent long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They take their leave. Marphisa, who as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither would go, departs the troop among.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa had long time, with sword and lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desired to prove the paladins of France;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And make experiment, if they indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such worth as is by Rumour voiced display.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sansonnet leaves another, in his stead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The city of Jerusalem to sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now these five, in chosen squadron, speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who have few peers in prowess, on their way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dismist by Norandine, to Tripoli</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They wend, and to the neighbouring haven hie.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And there a carack find, about to steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For western countries, taking in her store:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They, with the patron, for themselves and gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And horses, make accord; a seaman hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Luna he:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-239" id="noteref-239" epub:type="noteref">239</a> the heavens, on all sides clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vouch many days’ fair-weather. From the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They loose, with sky serene, and every sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the yare vessel stretched by favouring gale.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The island of the amorous deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Breathed upon them an air, in her first port,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which not alone to man does injury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But moulders iron; and here life is short;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—A marsh the cause⁠—and Nature certainly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wrongs Famagosta, poisoning, in such sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That city with Constantia’s fen malign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To all the rest of Cyprus so benign.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-240" id="noteref-240" epub:type="noteref">240</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The noxious scents that from the marish spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After short sojourn there, compel their flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The barque to a south-easter every wing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extends, and circles Cyprus to the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes Paphos’ island next, and, anchoring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The crew and warriors on the beach alight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those to ship merchandize, and these, at leisure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To view the laughing land of Love and Pleasure.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Inland six miles or seven from thence, a way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scales, with an easy rise, a pleasant hill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which myrtle, orange, cedar-tree, and bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other perfumed plants by thousands fill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thyme, marjoram, crocus, rose, and lily gay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From odoriferous leaf such sweets distill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they who sail the sea the fragrance bland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scent in each genial gale which blows from land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A fruitful rill, by limpid fountain fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waters, all round about, the fertile space.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The land of Venus truly may be said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That passing joyous and delightful place:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For every maid and wife, who there is bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is through the world beside, unmatched in grace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Venus wills, till their last hour be tolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Love should warm their bosoms, young and old.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas here they heard the same which they before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the orc and of Lucina, erst had heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Syria; how she to return once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Nicosià, to her lord prepared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence (a fair wind now blowing from the shore)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His bark for sea the ready Patron cleared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hawled up his anchor, westward turned the head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the good ship, and all his canvas spread.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the north wind, which blew upon their right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stretching to seaward, they their sails untie:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When lo! a south-south-wester, which seemed light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the beginning, while the sun was high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And afterwards increased in force t’wards night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raised up the sea against them mountains high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such dread flashes, and loud peals of thunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Heaven, to swallow all in fire, would sunder.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The clouds their gloomy veil above them strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor suffer sun or star to cheer the view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above the welkin roared, beneath the main:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On every side the wind and tempest grew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, with sharp piercing cold and blinding rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afflicted sore the miserable crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While aye descending night, with deeper shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vext and fearful billows overlayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sailors, in this war of wind and flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were prompt to manifest their vaunted art.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One blowing through the shrilling whistle stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the signal taught the rest their part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One clears the best bower anchor: one is good</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To lower,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-241" id="noteref-241" epub:type="noteref">241</a> this other to hawl home or start</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The braces; one from deck the lumber cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this secured the tiller, that the mast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The cruel wind increased throughout the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which grew more dismal and more dark than hell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wary Patron stood to sea outright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he believed less broken was the swell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And turned his prow to meet, with ready sleight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The buffets of the dreadful waves which fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never without some hope, that at day-break</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The storm might lull, or else its fury slake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It lulls not, nor its fury slakes, but grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wilder, shows worse by day⁠—if this be day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which but by reckoning of the hours is known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not by any cheering light or ray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, with more fear (his weaker hope o’erthrown):</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sorrowing Patron to the wind gives way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He veers his barque before the cruel gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scowers the foaming sea with humble sail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While Fortune on the sea annoys this crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She grants those others small repose by land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those left in France, who one another slew⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The men of England and the paynim band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These bold Rinaldo broke and overthrew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor troops nor banners spread before him stand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I speak of him, who his Bayardo fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had spurred the gallant Dardinel to meet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The shield, of which Almontes’ son was vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That of the quarters, good Rinaldo spied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deemed him bold, and of a valiant strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with Orlando’s ensign dared to ride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approaching nearer, this appeared more plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When heaps of slaughtered men he round him eyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Better it were,” he cried, “to overthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This evil plant, before it shoot and grow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Each to retreat betook him, where the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His face directed, and large passage made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor less the Saracens than faithful, clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The way, so reverenced is Fusberta’s blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save Dardinel, Mount Alban’s cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saw none, nor he to chase his prey delayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom, “He cast upon thee mickle care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poor child, who of that buckler left thee heir.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I seek thee out to prove (if thou attend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My coming) how thou keep’st the red and white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thou, save this from me thou canst defend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Canst ill defend it from Orlando’s might.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him the king: “Now clearly comprehend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I what I bear, as well defend in fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I more honour hope than trouble dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From my paternal quartering, white and red.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Have thou no hope to make me fly, or yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To thee my quarters, though a child I be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My life shalt thou take from me, if my shield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I, in God, well hope the contrary.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—This as it may!⁠—shall none, in fighting field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say that I ever shamed my ancestry.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So said, and grasping in his hand the sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youthful king assailed Mount Alban’s lord.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Upon all parts, a freezing fear goes through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heart-blood of each trembling paynim nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When they amazed the fierce Rinaldo view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who charged the monarch with such enmity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As might a lion, which a bullock, new</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To stings of love, should in a meadow spy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moor smote first, but fruitless was his task,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who beat in vain upon Mambrino’s casque.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo smiled, and said; “I’d have thee know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I am better skilled to find the vein.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spurs, and lets with that the bridle go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a thrust pushes with such might and main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—A thrust against the bosom of his foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That at his back the blade appears again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forth issued blood and soul, and from his sell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lifeless and cold the reeling body fell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As languishes the flower of purple hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which levelled by the passing ploughshare lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or as the poppy, overcharged with dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In garden droops its head in piteous wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From life the leader of Zumara’s crew<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-242" id="noteref-242" epub:type="noteref">242</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So past, his visage losing all its dyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So passed from life; and perished with their king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heart and hope of all his following.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As waters will sometime their course delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stagnant, and penned in pool by human skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, when the opposing dyke is broke away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fall, and with mighty noise the country fill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas so the Africans, who had some stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While Dardinello valour did instil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fled here and there, dismayed on every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When they him hurtling form his sell descried.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Letting the flyers fly, of those who stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Firm in their place, Rinaldo breaks the array;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ariodantes kills on every hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who ranks well nigh Rinaldo on that day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These Leonetto’s, those Zerbino’s brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’erturns, all rivals in the glorious fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well Charles and Oliver their parts have done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turpin and Ogier, Guido and Salomon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In peril were the Moors, that none again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should visit Heatheness, that day opprest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that the wise and wary king of Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gathered, and from the field bore off the rest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sit down with his loss he better gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteemed, that here to hazard purse and vest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better some remnant of the host to save,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than bid whole squadrons stand and find a grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He bids forthwith the Moorish ensigns be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Borne to the camp, which fosse and rampart span,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the bold monarch of Andology,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The valiant Portuguese, and Stordilan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sends to pray the king of Barbary,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-243" id="noteref-243" epub:type="noteref">243</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To endeavour to retire, as best be can;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who will no little praise that day deserve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he his person and his place preserve.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That king, who deemed himself in desperate case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever more Biserta hoped to see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, with so horrible and foul a face</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He never Fortune had beheld, with glee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heard that Marsilius had contrived to place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Part of his host in full security;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And faced about his banners and bade beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout his broken squadrons a retreat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the best portion neither signal knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor listened to the drum or trumpet’s sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So scared, so crowded is the wretched crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That many in Seine’s neighbouring stream are drowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agramant, who would form the band anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(With him Sobrino) scowers the squadrons round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with them every leader good combines</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bring the routed host within their lines.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But nought by sovereign or Sobrino done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, toiling, them with prayer or menace stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To march, where their ill-followed flags are gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can bring (I say not all) not even a third.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slaughtered or put to flight are two for one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who ’scapes⁠—nor he unharmed: among that herd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wounded is <em>this</em> behind, and <em>that</em> before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wearied, one and all, and harassed sore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And even within their lines, in panic sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They by the Christian bands are held in chase;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of all needful matters little store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was made there, for provisioning the place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charlemagne wisely by the lock before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would grapple Fortune, when she turned her face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that dark night upon the field descended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hushed all earthly matters and suspended:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By the Creator haply hastened, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was moved to pity for the works he made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The blood in torrents ran the country through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flooding the roads: while on the champaign laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were eighty thousand of the paynim crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cut off that day by the destroying blade:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Last trooped from caverns, at the midnight-hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Villain and wolf to spoil them and devour.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>King Charles returns no more within the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But camps without the city, opposite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moor’s cantonments, and bids up and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And round, high-piled and frequent watch-fires light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim fashions ditch and bastion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rampart and mine, and all things requisite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Visits his outposts, and his guards alarms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor all the livelong night puts off his arms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That livelong night the foes, throughout their tents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As insecure and with their scathe deprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poured tears, and uttered murmurs and laments;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, as they could, their sounds of woe supprest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One grief for slaughtered friends or kindred vents;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some are by sorrows of their own distrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As wounded or as ill at ease; but more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tremble at mischief which they deem in store.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Two Moors amid the paynim army were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From stock obscure in Ptolomita grown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of whom the story, an example rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of constant love, is worthy to be known:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Medoro and Cloridan were named the pair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, whether Fortune pleased to smile or frown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Served Dardinello with fidelity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And late with him to France had crost the sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of nimble frame and strong was Cloridane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout his life a follower of the chase.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cheek of white, suffused with crimson grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Medoro had, in youth a pleasing grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor bound on that emprize, ’mid all the train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was there a fairer or more jocund face.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-244" id="noteref-244" epub:type="noteref">244</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crisp hair he had of gold, and jet-black eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seemed an angel lighted from the skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These two were posted on a rampart’s height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With more to guard the encampment from surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When ’mid the equal intervals, at night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Medoro gazed on heaven with sleepy eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all his talk, the stripling, woful wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here cannot choose, but of his lord devise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The royal Dardinel; and evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, left unhonoured on the field, deplore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, turning to his mate, cries; “Cloridane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I cannot tell thee what a cause of woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It is to me, my lord upon the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should lie, unworthy food for wolf or crow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thinking how still to me he was humane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meseems, if in his honour I forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This life of mine, for favours so immense</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I shall but make a feeble recompense.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That he may lack not sepulture, will I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Go forth, and seek him out among the slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And haply God may will that none shall spy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Charles’s camp lies hushed. Do thou remain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, if my death be written in the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou may’st the deed be able to explain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that if Fortune foil so fear a feat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The world, through Fame, my loving heart may weet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Amazed was Cloridan a child should show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such heart, such love, and such fair loyalty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fain would make the youth his though forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he held passing dear; but fruitlessly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would move his steadfast purpose; for such woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will neither comforted nor altered be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Medoro is disposed to meet his doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or to enclose his master in the tomb.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Seeing that nought would bend him, nought would move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I too will go,” was Cloridan’s reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“In such a glorious act myself will prove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well such famous death I cover, I:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What other thing is left me, here above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deprived of thee, Medoro mine? To die</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With thee in arms is better, on the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than afterwards of grief, should’st thou be slain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus resolved, disposing in their place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their guard’s relief, depart the youthful pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leave fosse and palisade, and, in small space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are among ours, who watch with little care:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, for they little fear the paynim race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slumber with fires extinguished everywhere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid carriages and arms, they lie supine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up to the eyes, immersed in sleep and wine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A moment Cloridano stopt and cried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Not to be lost are opportunities.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This troop, by whom my master’s blood was shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Medoro, ought not I to sacrifice?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do thou, lest any one this way be led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Watch everywhere about, with ears and eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For a wide way, amid the hostile horde,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I offer here to make thee with my sword.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So said he, and his talk cut quickly short,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Coming where learned Alpheus slumbered nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had the year before sought Charles’s court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In medicine, magic, and astrology</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well versed; but now in art found small support,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or rather found that it was all a lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had foreseen, that he his long-drawn life</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should finish in the bosom of his wife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now the Saracen with wary view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has pierced his weasand with the pointed sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Four others he neat that Diviner, slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor gave the wretches time to say a word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Turpin in his story tells not who,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Time had of their names effaced record.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Palidon of Moncalier next he speeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One who securely sleeps between two steeds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next came the warrior where, with limbs outspread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pillowed on barrel, lay the wretched Gryll:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This he had drained, and undisturbed by dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoped to enjoy a peaceful sleep and still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The daring Saracen lopt off his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blood issues from the tap-hole, with a rill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of wine; and he, well drenched with many a can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dreams that he drinks, dispatched by Cloridan.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next Gryll, Andropono and Conrad hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A Greek and German, at two thrusts he gored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in the air had past large part of night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With dice and goblet; blest it at that board</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They still had watched, till, clothed in amber light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The radiant sun had traversed Indus’ ford!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But mortals Destiny would set at nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If every wight futurity were taught.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As, in full fold, a lion long unfed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom wasting famine had made lean and spare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Devours and rends, and swallows, and lays dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The feeble flock, which at his mercy are;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, in their sleep, the cruel paynim bled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our host, and made wide slaughter everywhere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor blunted was the young Medoro’s sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he disdained to smite the ignoble horde.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He to Labretto’s duke, leaving those dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had come, who slumbered with a gentle mate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each clasping each so closely in their bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That air between them could not penetrate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From both Medoro cleanly lopt the head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh! blessed way of death! oh! happy fate!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ’tis my trust, that as their bodies, so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their souls embracing to their bourne shall go.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Malindo, with Andalico, he slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His brother, sons to the earl of Flanders they:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom has bearings (each to arms was new)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charles had the lilies given; because that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch had beheld the valiant two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With crimsoned staves, returning from the fray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And them with lands in Flanders vowed to glad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would, but that Medoro this forbad.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rearing the insidious blade, the pair are near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The place, where round King Charles’ pavilion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are tented warlike paladin and peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guarding the side that each is camped upon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When in good time the paynims backward steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sheathe their swords, the impious slaughter done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming impossible, in such a number,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But they must light on one who does not slumber.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And though they might escape well charged with prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To save themselves they think sufficient gain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither by what he deems the safest way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Medoro following him) went Cloridane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, in the field, ’mid bow and falchion, lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shield and spear, in pool of purple stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wealthy and poor, the king and vassal’s corse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And overthrown the rider and his horse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The horrid mixture of the bodies there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which heaped the plain where roved these comrades sworn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might well have rendered vain their faithful care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid the mighty piles, till break of morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had not the moon, at young Medoro’s prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of a gloomy cloud put forth her horn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Medoro to the heavens upturns his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the moon, and thus devoutly cries:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O holy goddess! whom our fathers well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have styled as of a triple form, and who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy sovereign beauty dost in heaven, and hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And earth, in many forms reveal; and through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The greenwood holt, of beast and monster fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—A huntress bold⁠—the flying steps pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Show where my king, amid so many lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who did, alive, thy holy studies prize.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At the youth’s prayer from parted cloud outshone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Were it the work of faith or accident)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The moon, as fair, as when Endymion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She circled in her naked arms: with tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Christian or Saracen, was Paris-town</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seen in that gleam, and hill and plain’s extent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With these Mount Martyr and Mount Levy’s height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This on the left, and that upon the right.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-245" id="noteref-245" epub:type="noteref">245</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The silvery splendour glistened yet more clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There where renowned Almontes’ son lay dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faithful Medoro mourned his master dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who well agnized the quartering white and red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With visage bathed in many a bitter tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For he a rill from either eyelid shed),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And piteous act and moan, that might have whist</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The winds, his melancholy plaint to list;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But with a voice supprest: not that he aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Regards if any one the noise should hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he of his life takes any thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of which loathed burden he would fain be clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, lest his being heard should bring to nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pious purpose which has brought them here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youths the king upon their shoulders stowed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so between themselves divide the load.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hurrying their steps, they hastened, as they might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under the cherished burden they conveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now approaching was the lord of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sweep from heaven the stars, from earth the shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When good Zerbino, he, whose valiant sprite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was ne’er in time of need by sleep downweighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From chasing Moors all night, his homeward way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was taking to the camp at dawn of day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He has with him some horsemen in his train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That from afar the two companions spy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Expecting thus some spoil or prize to gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They, every one, towards that quarter hie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Brother, behoves us,” cried young Cloridane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“To cast away the load we bear, and fly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ’twere a foolish thought (might well be said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To lose <em>two</em> living men, to save <em>one</em> dead;”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And dropt the burden, weening his Medore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had done the same by it, upon his side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that poor boy, who loved his master more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His shoulders to the weight, alone, applied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cloridan hurrying with all haste before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming him close behind him or beside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, did he know his danger, him to save</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand deaths, instead of one, would brave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Those horsemen, with intent to make the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yield themselves prisoners to their band, or die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some here, some there, disperse the champaign through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every pass and outlet occupy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The captain, little distant from his crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is keener than the rest the chase to ply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, when he sees them hurrying in such guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is certain that the twain are enemies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of old an ancient forest clothed that lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of trees and underwood a tangled maze;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of salvage beasts alone the wild repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, like a labyrinth, full of narrow ways:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here from the boughs such shelter hope the pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As may conceal them well from hostile gaze.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But him I shall expect who loves the rhyme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To listen to my tale some other time.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
