<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-15" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Round about Paris every where are spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The assailing hosts of Africa and Spain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Astolpho home by Logistilla sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Binds first Caligorantes with his chain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next from Orrilo’s trunk divides the head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom Sir Aquilant had warred in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Gryphon bold: next Sansonet discerns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ill tidings of his lady Gryphon learns.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Though Conquest fruit of skill or fortune be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To conquer always is a glorious thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis true, indeed, a bloody victory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is to a chief less honour wont to bring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that fair field is famed eternally,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he who wins it merits worshipping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, saving from all harm his own, without</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loss to his followers, puts the foe to rout.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>You, sir, earned worthy praise, when you o’erbore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lion of such might by sea, and so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did by him, where he guarded either shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Francolino to the mouth of Pò,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I, though yet again I heard him roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If you were present, should my fear forego.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How fields are fitly won was then made plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For we were rescued, and your foemen slain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-195" id="noteref-195" epub:type="noteref">195</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>This was the Paynim little skilled to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was but daring to his proper loss;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the moat impelled his meiny, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One and all perished in the burning fosse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mighty gulf had not contained the crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that, devouring those who sought to cross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Them into dust the flame reduced, that room</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might be for all within the crowded tomb.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>Of twenty thousand warriors thither sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Died nineteen thousand in the fiery pit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to the fosse descended, ill content;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But so their leader willed, of little wit:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extinguished amid such a blaze, and spent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the devouring flame the Christians lit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Rodomont, occasion of their woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exempted from the mighty mischief goes:</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>For he to the inner bank, by foes possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Across the ditch had vaulted wonderously:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had he within it been, among the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It sure had been his last assault. His eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He turns, and when the wild-fires, which infest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The infernal vale, he sees ascend so high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hears his people’s moan and dying screams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With imprecations dread he Heaven blasphemes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>This while a band King Agramant had brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make a fierce assault upon a gate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For while the cruel battle here was fought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein so many sufferers met their fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This haply unprovided had he thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With fitting guard. Upon the monarch wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Bambirago, ’mid his knights of price,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Baliverso, sink of every vice.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>And Corineus of Mulga, Prusion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wealthy monarch of the blessed isles;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Malabuferzo, he who fills the throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Fez, where a perpetual summer smiles;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other noble lords, and many a one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well-armed and tried; and others ’mid their files,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Naked, and base, whose hearts in martial fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had found no shelter from a thousand shields.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But all things counter to the hopes ensue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Agramant upon his side; within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In person, girded by a gallant crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is Charlemagne, with many a paladin:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ogier the Duke, King Salamon, the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guidos are seen, and either Angelin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bavaria’s duke,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-196" id="noteref-196" epub:type="noteref">196</a> and Ganelon are here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Avino, Avolio, Otho, and Berlinghier:</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>And of inferior count withal, a horde</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Lombards, French, and Germans, without end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, every one, in presence of his lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rank among the valiantest contend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This will I in another place record;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who here a mighty duke perforce attend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who signs to me from far, and prays that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will not omit him in my history.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>’Tis time that I should measure back my way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, where I Astolpho left of yore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, in long exile, loathing more to stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Burnt with desire to tread his native shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As hopes to him had given the sober fay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who quelled Alcina by her better lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She with all care would send the warrior back</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the securest and the freest track.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>And thus by her a barque is fitted out;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—A better galley never ploughed the sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Logistilla wills, for aye in doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of hinderance from Alcina’s treachery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That good Andronica, with squadron stout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And chaste Sophrosina, with him shall be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till to the Arabian Sea, beneath their care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or to the Persian Gulf he safe repair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>By Scyth and Indian she prefers the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should coast, and by the Nabataean reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Content he, after such a round, should veer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Persian gulf, or Erithraean main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than for that Boreal palace steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where angry winds aye vex the rude domain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So ill, at seasons, favoured by the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That there, for months together, light is none.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Next, when she all in readiness espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her license to depart the prudent fay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accorded to the duke, first fortified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With counsel as to things too long to say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that he might no more by charms be stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In place from whence he could not wend his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him with a useful book and fair purveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ever for her love to wear it prayed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>How man should guard himself from magic cheats</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The book instructed, which the fay bestowed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the end or the beginning, where it treats</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of such, an index and appendix showed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another gift, which in its goodly feats</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All other gifts excelled, to her he owed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This was a horn, which made whatever wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should hear its clang betake himself to flight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>I say, the horn is of such horrid sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, wheresoe’er ’tis heard, all fly for fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor in the world is one of heart so sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That would not fly, should he the bugle hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wind, thunder, and the shock which rives the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come not, in aught, the hideous clangour near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With thanks did the good Englishman receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gift, and of the fairy took his leave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Quitting the port and smoother waves, they stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sea, with favouring wind which blows astern;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (coasting) round the rich and populous land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of odoriferous Ind the vessels turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Opening a thousand isles on either hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scattered about that sea, till they discern</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The land of Thomas; here the pilot veers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His ready tiller, and more northward steers.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-197" id="noteref-197" epub:type="noteref">197</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Astolpho, furrowing that ocean hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marks, as he coasts, the wealthy land at ease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ganges amid the whitening waters roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nigh skirting now the golden Chersonese;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Taprobana with Cori next, and sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The frith which chafes against its double shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes distant Cochin, and with favouring wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Issues beyond the boundaries of Ind.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-198" id="noteref-198" epub:type="noteref">198</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Scouring at large broad ocean, with a guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So faithful and secure, the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Questions Andronica, if from that side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Named from the westering sun, of this our sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bark, which with oars or canvas stemmed the tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On eastern sea was wonted to appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—And could a wight, who loosed from Indian strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reach France or Britain, without touching land.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Andronica to England’s duke replies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Know that this earth is girt about with seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all to one another yield supplies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether the circling waters boil or freeze:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, since the Aethiops’ land before us lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extending southward many long degrees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Across his waters, some one has supposed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A barrier here to Neptune interposed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Hence bark from this Levant of Ind is none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which weighs, to shape her course for Europe’s shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor navigates from Europe any one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our Oriental regions to explore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fain to retrace alike the course begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the mid land, extending wide before:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weening (its limits of such length appear)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it must join another hemisphere.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“But in the course of circling years I view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From farthest lands which catch the western ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">New Argonauts put forth, and Tiphys new</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Opening, till now an undiscovered way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Others I see coast Afric, and pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So far the negroes’ burning shore, that they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pass the far sign, from whence, on his return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sun moves hither, leaving Capricorn;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-199" id="noteref-199" epub:type="noteref">199</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And find the limit of this length of land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which makes a single sea appear as two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, scouring in their frigates every strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pass Ind and Arab isles, or Persian through:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Others I see who leave, on either hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The banks, which stout Alcides cleft in two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the manner of the circling sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek new lands and new creations run.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The imperial flags and holy cross I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fixed on the verdant shore; see some upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The shattered barks keep guard, and others go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A-field, by whom new countries will be won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ten chase a thousand of the flying foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Realms beyond Ind subdued by Arragon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And see all, wheresoe’er the warriors wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the fifth Charles’ triumphant captains bend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“That this way should be hidden was God’s will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of old, and ere ’twas known long time should run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor will he suffer its discovery, till</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sixth and seventh century be done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he delays his purpose to fulfil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that he would subject the world to one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The justest and most fraught with prudent lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or emperors, since Augustus, or before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Of Arragon and Austria’s blood I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the left bank of Rhine a monarch bred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No sovereign is so famed in history,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all whose goodly deeds are heard or read.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astraea reinthroned by him will be⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather restored to life, long seeming dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Virtues with her into exile sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him shall be recalled from banishment.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-200" id="noteref-200" epub:type="noteref">200</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“For such desert, Heaven’s bounty not alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Designs he should the imperial garland bear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Augustus’, Trajan’s, Mark’s, Severus’, crown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But <em>that</em> of every farthest land should wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which here and there extends, as yet unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yielding no passage to the sun and year;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wills that in his time Christ’s scattered sheep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should be one flock, beneath one Shepherd’s keep.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And that this be accomplished with more ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Writ in the skies from all eternity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Captains, invincible by lands and seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall heavenly Providence to him supply.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I mark Hernando Cortez bring, ’mid these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">New cities under Caesar’s dynasty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And kingdoms in the Orient so remote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That we of these in India have no note.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-201" id="noteref-201" epub:type="noteref">201</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“With Prospero Colonna, puissant peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A marquis of Pescara I behold;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A youth of Guasto next, who render dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hesperia to the flower-de-luce of gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see prepared to enter the career</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This third, who shall the laurel win and hold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As a good horse before the rest will dart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And first attain the goal, though last to start.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-202" id="noteref-202" epub:type="noteref">202</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“I see such faith, such valour in the deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of young Alphonso (such his name) confest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He in his unripe age⁠—nor he exceeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His sixth and twentieth year⁠—at Caesar’s hest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(A mighty trust) the imperial army leads:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saving which, Caesar not alone the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his fair empire saves, but may the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reduce, with ensigns by this chief unfurled.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“As with these captains, where the way by land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is free, he spreads the ancient empire’s sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So on the sea, which severs Europe’s strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Afric, open to the southern day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When with good Doria linked in friendly band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Victorious he shall prove in every fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This is that Andrew Doria who will sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From pirates, on all sides, your midland deep.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Pompey, though he chased rovers everywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was not his peer; for ill the thievish brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vanquished by him, in puissance, could compare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the most mighty realm that ever stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Doria singly will of the corsair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his own forces purge the briny flood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that I see each continent and isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quake at his name, from Calpe to the Nile.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Beneath the faith, beneath the warrantry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the redoubted chief, of whom I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see Charles enter fertile Italy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To which this captain clears the monarch’s way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But on his country, not himself, that fee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall he bestow, which is his labour’s pay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And beg her freedom, where himself perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another would to sovereign rule advance.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-203" id="noteref-203" epub:type="noteref">203</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The pious love he bears his native land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Honours him more than any battle’s gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Julius ever won on Afric’s strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or in thine isle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-204" id="noteref-204" epub:type="noteref">204</a> France, Thessaly, or Spain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor great Octavius does more praise command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Anthony who jousted for the reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With equal arms: in that the wrong outweighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Done to their native land⁠—their every praise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Let these, and every other wight who tries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To subject a free country, blush for shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor dare in face of man to lift his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he hears Andrew Doria’s honoured name!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him I see Charles other meed supplies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he beside his leaders’ common claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bestows upon the chief the sumptuous state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence Norman bands their power in Puglia date.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-205" id="noteref-205" epub:type="noteref">205</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Not only to this captain courtesy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall Charles display, still liberal of his store;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to all those who for the empery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his emprizes have not spared their gore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him to bestow a town⁠—a realm⁠—I see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon a faithful friend, rejoicing more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on all such as have good service done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than in new kingdom and new empire won.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Thus of the victories, by land and main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, when long course of years shall be complete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charles’ worthy captains for their lord will gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Andronica did with Astolpho treat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while, now loosening, tightening now, the rein</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the eastern winds, which blow upon their feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Making <em>this</em> serve or <em>that</em>, her comrade stands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the blasts rise or sink as she commands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>This while they saw, as for their port they made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How wide the Persian sea extends to sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence in few days the squadron was conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nigh the famed gulf from ancient Magi hight;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-206" id="noteref-206" epub:type="noteref">206</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here they found harbourage; and here were stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their wandering barks, which stern to shore were dight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Secure from danger from Alcina’s wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The duke by land continued hence his path.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He pricks through many a field and forest blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By many a vale and many a mountain gray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where robbers, now before and now behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oft threat the peer by night or open day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lion and dragon oft of poisonous kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other savage monsters cross his way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he no sooner has his bugle wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than these are scared and scattered by the sound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Through Araby the blest he fares, where grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thickets of myrrh, and gums odorous ooze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the sole phoenix makes her nest, although</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The world is all before her where to choose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the avenging sea which whelmed the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Israel, his way the duke pursues;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In which King Pharaoh and his host were lost;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From whence he to the land of heroes crost.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-207" id="noteref-207" epub:type="noteref">207</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>Astolpho along Trajan’s channel goes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-208" id="noteref-208" epub:type="noteref">208</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon that horse which has no earthly peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And moves so lightly, that the soft sand shows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No token of the passing cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who prints not grass, prints not the driven snows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Who dry-shod would the briny billows clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And strains so nimbly in the course, he wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thunderbolt and arrow leaves behind:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>Erst Argalìa’s courser, which was born</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From a close union of the wind and flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, nourished not by hay or heartening corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fed on pure air, and Rabican his name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His way the bearer of the magic horn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Following, where Nile received that river, came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But ere he at its outlet could arrive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards him saw a pinnace swiftly drive.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>A hermit in the poop the bark did guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With snowy beard descending to mid breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who when from far the Paladin be spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him to ascend his ready pinnace prest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“My son, unless thou loathest life, (he cried)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wouldst that Death to-day thy course arrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Content thee in my bark to cross the water;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For yonder path conducts thee straight to slaughter.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Within six miles, no further, shalt thou light”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Pursued the hermit) “on the bloody seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where dwells a giant, horrible to sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exceeding every stature by eight feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From him wayfaring man or errant knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would vainly hope with life to make retreat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For some the felon quarters, some he flays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And some he swallows quick, and some he slays.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“He, ’mid the cruel horrors he intends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Takes pleasure in a net, by cunning hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Contrived, which near his mansion he extends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So well concealed beneath the crumbling sands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That whoso uninstructed thither wends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nought of the subtle mischief understands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so the giant scares him with his cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he within the toils in terror flies;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Whom with loud laughter, to his seat hard by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He drags along, enveloped in his snare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knight and damsel views with equal eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for his prisoners’ worth has little care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, having sucked their brains and life-blood dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Casts forth their bones upon the desert lair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And round about his griesly palace pins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For horrid ornament, their bloody skins.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Take this⁠—my son, oh! take this other way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which thee will to the sea in safety guide.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I thank thee, holy father, for thy say,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(To him the fearless cavalier replied)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“But cannot peril against honour weigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far dearer than my life. To the other side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me vainly dost thou move to pass the wave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather for this I seek the giant’s cave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“I with dishonour life to flight may owe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But worse than death loath thus to save my head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The worst that can befall me if I go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is I my blood shall with the others shed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if on me such mercy God bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I remain alive, the giant dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Secure for thousands shall I make the ways;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that the greater good the risk o’erpays.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“I peril but the single life of one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against safety of the countless rest.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Go then in peace,” (the other said) “my son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to thy succour, form among the blest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May God dispatch the Archangel Michael down.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—And him, with that, the simple hermit blest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho pricks along Nile’s rosy strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More in his horn confiding than his brand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Between the mighty river and the fen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A path upon the sandy shore doth lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Barred by the giant’s solitary den,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cut off from converse with humanity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About it heads and naked limbs of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were fixed, the victims of his cruelty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Window or battlements was not, whence strung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might not be seen some wretched prisoner hung.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>As in hill-farm or castle, fenced with moat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hunter, mindful what his dangers were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye fastens on his door the shaggy coat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And horrid paws and monstrous head of bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So showed the giant those of greatest note,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, thither brought, had perished in his snare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bones of countless others wide were spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every ditch with human blood was red.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>Caligorant was standing at the gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For so was the despiteous monster hight);</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who decked his house with corpses, as for state</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some theirs with cloth of gold and scarlet dight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He scarce contained himself for joy, so great</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His pleasure, when the duke appeared in sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ’twas two months complete, a third was near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since by that road had past a cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>Towards the marish, where green rushes grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hastes, intending from that covert blind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To double on his unsuspecting foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And issue on the cavalier behind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him to drive into the net, below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sand, the griesly giant had designed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As others trapt he had been wont to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brought thither by their evil destiny.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When him the wary paladin espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He stopt his courser, not without great heed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest he into the covert snare might tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forewarned of this by the good hermit’s rede.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here to his horn for succour he applied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor failed its wonted virtue in this need:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It smote the giant’s heart with such affright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he turned back, and homeward fled outright.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Astolpho blew, still watchful of surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weening to see the engine sprung: fast flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The giant⁠—as if heart as well as eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thief had lost⁠—nor whitherward he knew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such is his fear, he kens not as he flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How is own covert mischief to eschew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He runs into the net, which closing round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hampers the wretch, and drags him to the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>Astolpho, who beholds his bulky prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fall bodily, drives thither at full speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Secure himself, and, bent to make him pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The price of slaughtered thousands, quits his steed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet after, deems a helpless wight to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No valour were, but rather foul misdeed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him, arms, neck, and feet so closely tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He could not shake himself, the warrior spied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>With subtle thread of steel had Vulcan wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The net of old, and with such cunning pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, who to break its weakest mesh had sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have bestowed his time and toil in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It was with this he Mars and Venus caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, hands and feet, were fettered by the chain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor did the jealous husband weave the thread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For aught, but to surprise that pair in bed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Mercury from the smith conveyed the prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wanting to take young Chloris in the snare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweet Chloris, who behind Aurora flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At rise of sun, through fields of liquid air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from her gathered garment, through the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scatters the violet, rose, and lily fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He for this nymph his toils so deftly set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One day, in air he took her with the net.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The nymph (it seems) was taken as she flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the great Aethiop river meets the brine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The net was treasured in Canopus, through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Successive ages, in Anubis’ shrine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After three thousand years, Caligorant drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sacred relict from the palace divine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence with the net the impious thief returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who robbed the temple and the city burned,</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>He fixed it here, beneath the sandy plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In mode, that all the travellers whom he chased</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ran into it, and the engine was with pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Touched, ere it arms, and feet, and neck embraced.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From this the good Astolpho took a chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the gyve his hands behind him laced:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His arms and breast he swaddled in such guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He could not loose himself; then let him rise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>After, his other knots unfastening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For he was turned more gentle than a maid)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho, as a show, the thief would bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By city, borough-town, and farm conveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The net as well; than which no quainter thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was ever by the file and hammer made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On him, like sumpter-nag he laid the load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In triumph led, behind him, on his road.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Him helm and shield he gives alike to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to a valet; hence proceeds the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gladdening the fearful pilgrim every where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who joys to think, henceforth his way is clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So far an end does bold Astolpho fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He is to Memphis’ tombs already near⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Memphis renowned for pyramids; in sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He marks the populous Cairo opposite.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Ran all the people in tumultuous tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see him drag the unmeasured wight along.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“How can it be,” (each to his fellow cried)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That one so weak could master one so strong?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarce can Astolpho put the press aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So close from every part their numbers throng;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While all admire him as a cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of mighty worth, and make him goodly cheer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Then Cairo was not such, as common cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pronounces in our age that costly seat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—That eighteen thousand districts ill supply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lodging to those who in her markets meet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—And though the houses are three stories high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Numbers are forced to sleep in the open street;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that the soldan has a palace there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of wonderous size, and passing rich and fair;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And therein (Christian renegadoes all)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Keeps fifteen thousand vassals, for his needs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath one roof supplied with bower and stall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Themselves, and wives, and families, and steeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The duke desired to see the river’s fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how far Nile into the sea proceeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At Damietta; where wayfaring wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He heard, was prisoner made or slain outright.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>For at Nile’s outlet there, beside his bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A sturdy thief was sheltered in a tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alike the native’s and the stranger’s dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wont even to Cairo’s gate the road to scower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him no one could resist, and, it was said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That man to slay the felon had no power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hundred thousand wounds he had in strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Received, yet none could ever take his life.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>To see if he could break the thread which tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The felon’s life, upon his way the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Set forward, and to Damietta hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To find Orrilo, so the thief was hight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence to the river’s outlet past, and spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sturdy castle on the margin dight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Harboured in which the enchanted demon lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fruit of a hobgoblin and a fay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>He here Orrilo and two knights in mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Found at fierce strife: the two ill held their own</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against him; so Orrilo did assail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warlike pair, although himself alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how much either might in arms avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fame through the universal world had blown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Oliviero’s seed was either plant;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gryphon the white, and sable Aquilant.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The necromancer had this while (to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The truth,) with vantage on his side, begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fight, who brought a monster to the fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Found only in those parts, and wont to won</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ashore or under water, and to prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For food, on human bodies; feeding on</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poor mariners and travelling men, who fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the impending danger, unaware.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The monster, slaughtered by the brethren two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the sand beside the haven lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence no wrong they to Orrilo do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assailing him together in this guise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him they dismembered often, and not slew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now he⁠—because dismembered⁠—ever dies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he replaces leg or hand like wax,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the good faulchion from his body hacks.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Gryphon and Aquilant by turns divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now to the teeth, now breast, the enchanted wight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fruitless blow Orrilo does deride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the two baffled warriors rage for spite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let him who falling silver has espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Which mercury by alchymists is hight),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scatter, and reunite each broken member,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hearing my tale, what he has seen remember.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>If the thief’s head be severed by the pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He lights and staggers till he finds it; now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uptaken by the nose or by the hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fastened to the neck, I know not how.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This sometimes Gryphon takes, and, whirled through air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whelms in the stream; but bootless is the throw:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For like a fish can fierce Orrilo swim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And safely, with the head, regains the brim.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Two ladies, meetly clad in fair array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One damsel was in black and one in white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who had been the occasion of that fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood by to gaze upon the cruel fight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Either of these was a benignant fay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose care had nourished one and the other knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oliver’s children; when the babes forlorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They from the claws of two huge birds had torn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Since, from Gismonda they had these conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Borne to a distance from their native sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But more to say were needless, since displayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the whole world has been their history.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though the author has the father’s name mis-said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One for another (how I know not, I)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mistaking. Now this fearful strife the pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of warriors waged at both the ladies’ prayer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Though it was noon in the happy islands, day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had vanished in this clime, displaced by night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, underneath the moon’s uncertain ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ill-discerned, were all things hid from sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When to the fort Orrilo took his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since both the sable sister and the white</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were pleased the furious battle to defer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till a new sun should in the horizon stir.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>The duke, who by their ensigns, and yet more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had by the sight of many a vigorous blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gryphon and Aquilant long time before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agnized, to greet the brethren was not slow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they, who in the peer, victorious o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The giant, whom he led a captive, know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The <b>Baron of the Pard</b>, (so styled at court)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him to salute, with no less love resort.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The ladies to repose the warriors led</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a fair palace near, their sumptuous seat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence issuing courtly squire and damsel sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Them with lit torches in mid-way to meet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their goodly steeds they quit, there well bested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Put off their arms, and in a garden sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discern the ready supper duly laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fast by, where a refreshing fountain played.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Here they bid bind the giant on the green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fast-tethered by a strong and weighty chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a tough oak, whose ancient trunk they ween</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May well be proof against a single strain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that, by ten good serjeants overseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest he by night get loose, and so the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assault and haply harm; while careless they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without a guard and unsuspecting lay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>At the abundant and most sumptuous board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With costly viands (its least pleasure) fraught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The longest topic for discourse afford</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orrilo’s prowess, and the marvel wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For head or arm dissevered by the sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They (who upon the recent wonder thought)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might think a dream to see him re-unite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And but return more furious to the fight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Astolpho in his book had found exprest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(That which prescribed a remedy for spell)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How he who of one hair deprived the pest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Only could him in battle hope to quell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But this plucked out or sheared, he from his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Parforce the felon’s spirit would expell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So says the volume; but instructs not where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid locks so thickly set, to find the hair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>The duke no less with hope of conquest glows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than if the palm he has already won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he that hopes with small expense of blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To pluck the hair, the wizard-wight undone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence does he to the youthful pair propose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The burden of that enterprize upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself to take: Orrilo will he slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If the two brethren nought the intent gainsay,</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>But willingly to him these yield the emprize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assured his toil will be bestowed in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now a new Aurora climbs the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from his walls Orrilo on the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drops⁠—and the strife begins⁠—Orrilo plies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mace, the duke the sword; he ’mid a rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of strokes would from the body at one blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Divorce the spirit of the enchanted foe:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Together with the mace he lops the fist;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now this arm, now the other falls to ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sometimes he cleaves the corslet’s iron twist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And piecemeal shares and maims the felon round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orrilo re-unites the portions missed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Found on the champagne, and again is sound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, though into a hundred fragments hewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho sees him, in a thought, renewed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>After a thousand blows, Astolpho sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One stroke, above the shoulders and below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The chin, which lopt away both helm and head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor lights the duke less swiftly than his foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then grasps the hair defiled with gore and red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Springs in a moment on his horse, and lo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up-stream with it along Nile’s margin hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that the thief cannot retake the prize.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>That fool, who had not marked the warrior’s feat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was searching in the dust to find his head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when he heard the charger in retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who through the forest with the plunder fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leapt quickly into his own courser’s seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in pursuit of bold Astolpho sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fain had Orrilo shouted “Hola! stay!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that the duke had borne his mouth away:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet pleased Astolpho had not in like guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Borne off his heels, pursues with flowing rein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him Rabican, who marvellously flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Distances by a mighty length of plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while the wizard’s head Astolpho eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From poll to front, above the eyebrows twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Searching, in haste, if he the hair can see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which makes Orrilo’s immortality.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Amid innumerable locks, no hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Straiter or crisper than the rest was seen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How then should good Astolpho, in his care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To slay the thief, so many choose between?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“To cut them all (he said) it better were.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And since he scissors lacked and razor keen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He wanting these, resorted to his glaive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which cut so well, it might be said to shave;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And, holding, by the nose, the severed head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Close-sheared it all, behind and eke before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He found, among the rest, the fatal thread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then pale became the visage, changing sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turned up its eyes, and signals sore and dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the last agony of nature wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the headless body seated in the sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shuddered its last, and from the courser fell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The duke returns where he the champions two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dames had left, the trophy in his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which manifests of death the tokens true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shows the distant body on the sand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not if they this with pleasure view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though him they welcome with demeanour bland:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the intercepted victory might pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perchance inflict upon the envying twain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor do I think that either gentle fay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With pleasure could that battle’s issue see:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since those kind dames, because they would delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The doleful fate which shortly was to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In France the brethren’s lot, had in that fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With fierce Orrilo matched the warriors free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so to occupy the pair had cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till the sad influence of the skies were past.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>When to the castellan was certified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Damietta, that the thief was dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He loosed a carrier-pigeon, having tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath her wing a letter by a thread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She went to Cairo; and, to scatter wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The news, another from that town was sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Such is the usage there); so, Egypt through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a few hours the joyful tidings flew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>As he had brought the adventure to an end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The duke now sought the noble youths to stir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Though of themselves that way their wishes tend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor they to whet that purpose need the spur)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they the Church from outrage to defend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rights of Charles, the Roman Emperor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would cease to war upon that Eastern strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would seek honour in their native land.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>Gryphon and Aquilant thus bid adieu,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One and the other, to his lady fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, though it sorely troubled them, ill knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How to resist the wishes of the pair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The duke, together with the warlike two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turns to the right, resolved to worship, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God erst incarnate dwelt, the holy places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere he to cherished France his way retraces.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The warriors to the left-hand might incline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As plainer and more full of pleasant cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where still along the sea extends their line;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But take the right-hand path, abrupt and drear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since the chief city of all Palestine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By six days’ journey, is, through this, more near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Water there is along this rugged track,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grass; all other needful matters lack.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>So that, before they enter on their road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All that is needful they collect, and lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the giant’s back the bulky load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who could a tower upon his neck convey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Holy Land a mountain-summit showed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At finishing their rough and salvage way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where <b>Heavenly Love</b> a willing offering stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And washed away our errors with his blood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>They, at the entrance of the city, view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A gentle stripling; and in him the three</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agnize Sir Sansonet of Mecca, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was, in youth’s flower, for sovereign chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For sovereign goodness, famed the country through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wise beyond his years: from paganry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Converted by Orlando to the truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had, with his own hands, baptised the youth.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Designing there a fortilage, in front</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Egypt’s caliph they the warrior found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with a wall two miles in length, the mount</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Calvary intending to surround.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Received with such a countenance, as is wont</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be of inward love the surest ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Them he conducted to his royal home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with all comfort, harboured in the dome.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>As deputy, the sainted land he swayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conferred on him by Charlemagne, in trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him the English duke a present made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that so sturdy and unmeasured beast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it ten draught-horse burdens had conveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So monstrous was the giant and robust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho gave the giant, and next gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The net, in which he took the unwieldy slave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>In quittance, Sansonet, his sword to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gave a rich girdle to Astolpho bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And spurs for either heel, a costly pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With bucklers and with rowels made of gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which (’twas believed) the warrior’s relicts were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who freed the damsel from that dragon old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spoils, which Sir Sansonet, with many more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Joppa, when he took the city, bore</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Cleansed of their errors in a monastery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From whence the odour of good works upwent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They of Christ’s passion every mystery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Contemplating, through all the churches went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which now, to our eternal infamy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foul Moor usurp; what time on strife intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All Europe rings with arms and martial deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And war is everywhere but where it needs.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>While grace the warlike three devoutly sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Intent on pardon and on pious lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A Grecian pilgrim, known to Gryphon, brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tidings, which ill the afflicted champion bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From his long-cherished vow and former thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too foreign, too remote; and these so sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflamed his troubled breast, and bred such care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They wholly turned aside his mind from prayer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>For his misfortune, one of lovely feature</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Gryphon worshipped, Origilla hight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fairer visage and of better stature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not one among a thousand meets the sight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But faithless, and of such an evil nature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou mightst town and city search outright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And continent and island, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet, never, as I think, wouldst find her peer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>In Constantine’s imperial city, burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a fierce fever, he had left the fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hoped to find her, to that place returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lovelier than ever; and enjoy her there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But she to Antioch (as the warrior learned)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had with another leman made repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thinking, while such fresh youth was yet her own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twere not a thing to brook⁠—to sleep alone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Sir Gryphon, from the time he heard the news,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had evermore bemoaned him, day or night:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whatever pleasure other wight pursues</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seems but the more to vex his troubled sprite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let each reflect, who to his mischief woos,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How keenly tempered are Love’s darts of might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, heavier than all ills, the torment fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that he was ashamed his grief to tell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>This; for that Aquilant had oft before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reproved him for the passion which he nursed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sought to banish her from his heart’s core;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Her, who of all bad women is the worst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He still had censured, in his wiser lore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If by his brother Aquilant accurst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her Gryphon, in his partial love, excuses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For mostly self-conceit our sense abuses.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>It therefore is his purpose, without say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Aquilant, alone to take the quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As far as Antioch, and bear her away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had borne off his heart-core from his breast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To find him, who had made the dame his prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And take such vengeance of him, ere he rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As shall for aye be told. My next will tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How he effected this, and what befell.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
