<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-38" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>To Arles the Child, to Charles Marphisa wends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be baptized, with Bradamant for guide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Astolpho from the holy realm descends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through whom with sight the Nubian is supplied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Agramant’s land he with his troop offends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he is of his Africk realm so wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Charles he bargains, that, on either side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two knights by strife their quarrel should decide.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Ye courteous ladies, who unto my strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kind audience lend⁠—I read it in your cheer⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That good Rogero should depart again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So suddenly, from her that held him dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Displeases ye, and scarce inflicts less pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than that which Bradamant endured whilere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I read you also argue, to his shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That feebly burned in him the amorous flame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>If from her side for other cause had gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against that lady’s will, the youthful lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though in the hope more treasure to have won</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than swelled rich Croesus’ or rich Crassus’ hoard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I too should deem the dart, by Cupid thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had not the heart-core of Rogero gored.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such a sovereign joy, a prize so high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No silver and no gold could ever buy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet to preserve our honour not alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deserves excuse, it also merits praise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This to preserve, I say, when to have done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In other wise, might shame and scandal raise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had fair Bradamant reluctance shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And obstinately interposed delays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This, as a certain sign, had served to prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That lady’s little wit or little love.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>For if <em>his</em> life, whom gentle woman loves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As her own life she values, or before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(I speak of one at whom young Cupid roves<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With arrows which beneath the mantle gore)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His honour to his pleasure it behoves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That woman to prefer, by so much more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As man beyond his life his honour treasures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteemed by him above all other pleasures.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>His duty good Rogero satisfied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Following the royal lord with whom he came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For having no fair cause to quit his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He could not leave the Paynim without shame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if his sire had by Almontes died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this, King Agramant was not to blame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for his parents’ every past offence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had made Rogero mighty recompense.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>He will perform his duty to repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his liege lord; so did that martial maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had not with reiterated prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As so she might have done) Rogero stayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stripling may appay the warlike fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In other season, if not now appaid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But twice two hundred years will not atone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The crying sin of honour once foregone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>To Arles-town, whither had his king conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His remnant of a host, he pricked anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While they that, since their kindred was displayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had a close friendship formed⁠—the damsels two⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither together go where Charles had made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His mightiest effort, with the Christian crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping by siege or fight to break the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And free his kingdom form so long a woe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Bradamant, when she in the camp appeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was greeted with a welcome warm and kind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On all sides was she hailed, by all was cheered;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she in this or that her head inclined.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, when he of her coming heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Met her; nor young Richardo stayed behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Richardet; nor others of her race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all received the maid with joyful face.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>When next ’tis known, the second of the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is that Marphisa, so in arms renowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who from Catày unto the bounds of Spain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had journeyed, with a thousand laurels crowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor rich nor poor within their tents remain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The curious crowd, encompassing them round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Press, harm, and heave each other here and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the sole wish to see so bright a pair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>By them was Charles saluted reverently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the first day was this (has Turpin shown)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa had been seen to bend her knee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Pepin’s royal son to her, alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deserving of such duty seemed to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid emperors or kings that filled a throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Baptized or infidel, of all those named</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For mighty riches, or for valour famed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>Her kindly Charlemagne received, and wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the pavilions met, in open view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, above king, and prince, and peer, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself the monarch placed that damsel true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who go not, are dismist; so none abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In little time, except the good and few.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Paladins and lords remain; without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is left the unrespected rabble-rout.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa first began in grateful strain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Unconquered Caesar, glorious and august,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, to Alcides’ strait from Indian main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mak’st Scythian’s pale and Aethiop’s race adust</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Revere thy Christian cross of snowy grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Of earthly monarchs thou most sage and just⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hither thy glory, which no limits bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has brought me from the world’s extremest ground;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And (to avow the truth) in jealous mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone I came, alone with thee to fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I grudged that king so puissant shou’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exist on earth, save he observed my rite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence reek they ravaged fields with Christian blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet with greater rancour and despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like cruel foe, I purposed to offend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that it chanced, one changed me to a friend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“When to worst harm and scaith thy bands I doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I find (as at my leisure I will show)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero of Risa was my father, whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An evil brother traitorously laid low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me my sad mother carried in her womb</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond the sea, and bore in want and woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till my seventh year by wizard nourished, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was stolen from him by thieves of Araby.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>“They to a king in Persia vended me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That after died beneath my faulchion, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would fain have taken my virginity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When grown, that king and all his court I slew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chased his ill race, and seized his royalty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And⁠—such my fortune⁠—by a month or two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I eithteen years had not o’erpast, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I added to my realm six kingdoms more;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“And, moved by envy of thy glorious fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I in my heart resolved (as thou hast heard)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To abate the grandeur of they mighty name:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I haply so had done; I haply erred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now a chance has served <em>that</em> will to tame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And clip my fury’s wings; the having heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since I arrived in Christendom, how we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are bound by ties of consanguinity;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And, for my father thee, as kinsman, served,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So thou a kin and servant hast in me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I that envy, that fierce hate, which nerved</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mine arm whilere, now blot from memory.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay, these for evil Agramant reserved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for his sire’s and uncle’s kin shall be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They who were whilom guilty of the death</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that unhappy pair, who gave me breath.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She adds, “the Christian faith she will receive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, after having spent king Agramant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will home return, with royal Charles’s leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her kingdom to baptise in the Levant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And war upon whatever nation cleave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To cheating Mahound or to Termagant;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Promising that whate’er her arms obtain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall be the Christian faith’s and empire’s gain.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Charles, no less eloquent upon his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than bold in deed and prudent in design,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much that illustrious lady magnified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And much her father, much her noble line:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He courteously to every point replied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of his heart his open front was sign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As his last words, “that he received the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As kinswoman and child,” the monarch said.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>Then rose and locked her in a new embrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And kissed her, like a daughter, on the brow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Morgana and Clermont’s kin, with joyful face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All thither troop; ’twere tedious to tell how</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo did the gentle damsel grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he had oftentimes espied ere now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her martial prowess, tried by goodly test,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When they with girding siege Albracca pressed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>’Twere long to tell how, with those worthies met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guido rejoiced to see Marphisa there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gryphon and Aquilant, and Sansonet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That with her in the cruel city were;<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vivian, and Malagigi, and Richardet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, when Maganza’s traitors made repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With those ill purchasers of Spain to trade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Found such a faithful comrade in the maid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>They deck the ground for the ensuing day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Charlemagne takes care himself to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they the place shall sumptuously array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein Marphisa’s baptism is to be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bishops are gathered, learned clerks, and they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who ken the laws of Christianity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That taught in all its doctrine by their care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And holy skill may be that martial fair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>In sacred stole, pontifical, arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her the archbishop Turpin did baptize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charlemagne from the healthful font the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uplifted with befitting ceremonies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But it is time the witless head to aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that, which treasured in the phial lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith Astolpho, from the lowest star,<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descended in Elias’ fiery car.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The duke descended from the lucid round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On this our earthly planet’s loftiest height.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wither he with that blessed vase was bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which was the mighty champion’s brain to right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A herb of sovereign virtue on that ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The apostle shows, and with it bids the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Nubian’s eyeballs touch, when him anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He visits, and restore that sovereign’s view.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>That he, for this and for his first desert,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May give him bands, Biserta to assail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shows him how that people inexpert</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He may to battle train, in plate and mail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how to pass the deserts, without hurt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where men are dazzled by the sandy gale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The order that throughout should be maintained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From point to point, the sainted sire explained;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Then made him that plumed beast again bestride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero’s and Atlantes’ steed whilere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By sainted John dismist, his reverend guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those holy regions left the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And coasting Nile, on one or the other side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saw Nubia’s realm before him soon appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there, in its chief city, to the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descended, and anew Senapus found.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Great was the joy, and great was the delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith that king received the English lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who well remembered how the gentle knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had from the loathsome harpies freed his board.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when the humour, that obscured his sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Valiant Astolpho scaled, and now restored</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was the blind sovereign’s eyesight as before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would that warrior as a god adore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>So that not only those whom he demands</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the Bisertine war, he gives in aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But adds a hundred thousand from his bands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And offer of his royal person made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarce on the open plain embattled stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—All foot⁠—the Nubian host, for war arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For few the horses which that region bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of elephants and camels a large store.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The night before the day, when on its road</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Nubian force should march, Astolpho rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his winged hippogryph again bestrode:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, hurrying ever south, in fury goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a high hill, the southern wind’s abode;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence he towards the Bears in fury blows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There finds a cave, through whose strait entrance breaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fell and furious Auster, when he wakes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>He, as his master erst instruction gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him an empty bladder had conveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, at the vent of that dim Alpine cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein reposed the wearied wind, was laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quaintly and softly by the baron brave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so unlooked for was the ambuscade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, issuing forth at morn, to sweep the plains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Auster imprisoned in the skin remains.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>To Nubia he, rejoicing in his prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returns; and with that very light the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the black host, sets out upon his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lets the victual follow in his rear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards Mount Atlas with his whole array</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In safety goes the glorious cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through shifting plains of powdery sand he past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor dreaded danger from the sultry blast;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>And having gained the mountain’s hither side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence are discerned the plain, and distant brine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He chooses from the swarm he has to guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The noblest and most fit for discipline;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And makes them, here and there, in troops divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At a hill’s foot, wherewith the plains confine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then leaves his host and climbs the hill’s ascent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like one that is on lofty thoughts intent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>After he, lowly kneeling in the dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His holy master had implored, in true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assurance he was heard, he downward thrust</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A heap of stones. O what things may he do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in the Saviour wholly puts his trust!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stones beyond the use of nature grew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which rolling to the sandy plain below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next, neck and muzzle, legs and belly show.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>They, neighing shrill, down narrow paths repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With lusty leaps; and lighting on the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uplift the croup, like coursers as they are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some bay, some roan, and some of dapple stain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The crowds that waiting in the valleys were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Layed hands on them, and seized them by the rein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus in a thought each soldier had his horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Born ready reined and saddled for the course.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>He fourscore thousand of his Nubian power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One hundred and two footmen, in a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To horsemen changes, who wide Afric scour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, upon every side, sack, burn, and slay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agramant had intrusted town and tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till his return, to king Branzardo’s sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Fersa’s king, and him of the Algaziers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these against Astolpho lead their spears.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Erewhile a nimble bark, with sail and oar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They had dispatched, which, stirring feet and wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">News of the Nubian monarch’s outrage bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Agramant from his vicegerent kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That rests not, night nor day, till to the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Provence she her doleful tiding brings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And finds her monarch half subdued in Arles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For camped within a mile was conquering Charles.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Agramant, hearing in what peril lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His realm, through his attack on Pepin’s reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him in this pressing peril to advise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calls kings and princes of the paynim train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when he once or twice has turned his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On sage Sobrino and the king of Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Eldest and wisest they those lords among⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch so bespeaks the assembled throng:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Albeit if fits not captain, as I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To say, ‘on this I thought not,’ this I say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because when from a quarter comes the blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From every human forethought far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis for such fault a fair excuse, I trow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here all hinges; I did ill to lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unfurnished Africk open to attack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If there was ground to fear the Nubian sack.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“But who could think, save only God on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prescient of all which is to be below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, from land, beneath such distant sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such mighty host would come, to work us woe?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twixt shifting sands, which restless whirlwinds blow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet they their camp have round Biserta placed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And laid the better part of Africk waste.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>“I now on this, O peers! your counsel crave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If, bootless, homeward I should wend my way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or should not such a fair adventure wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till Charles with me a prisoner I convey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or how I may as well our Africk save,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ruin this redoubted empire, say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who can advise, is prayed his lore to shew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That we may learn the best, and that pursue.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>He said; and on Marsilius seated nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next turned his eyes, who in the signal read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it belonged to him to make reply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To what the king of Africa had said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Spaniard rose, and bending reverently</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Agramant the knee as well as head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again his honoured seat in council prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in these words the Moorish king addrest:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>“My liege, does Rumour good or ill report,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It still increases them; hence shall I ne’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under despondence, lack for due support,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor bolder course than is befitting steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For what may chance, of good or evil sort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weighing in even balance hope and fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’errated still; and which we should not mete</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By what I hear so many tongues repeat;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Which should so much more doubtfully be viewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As it seems less with likelihood to stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now it is seen, if there be likelihood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That king who reigns in so remote a land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Followed by such a mighty multitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should set his foot on warlike Africk’s strand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Traversing sands, to which in evil hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cambyses trusted his ill-omened power.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“I well believe, that from some neighbouring hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Arabs have poured down, to waste the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, for the country was defended ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have taken, burnt, destroyed and sacked and slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that Branzardo, who your place doth fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As viceroy and lieutenant of the reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has set down thousands, where he tens should write;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The better to excuse him in your sight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>“The Nubian squadrons, I will even yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have been rained down on Africk from the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or haply they have come, in clouds concealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that their march was hidden from all eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Think you, because unaided in the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your Africk from such host in peril lies?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your garrisons were sure of coward vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If they were scared by such a craven train.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“But will you send some frigates, albeit few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Provided that unfurled your standards be)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No sooner shall they loose from hence, that crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of spoilers shall within their confines flee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Nubians are they, or idle Arabs⁠—who,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knowing that you are severed by the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From your own realm, and warring with our band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have taken courage to assail your land.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Now take your time for vengeance, when the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Pepin is without his nephew’s aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since bold Orlando is away, by none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the hostile sect resistance can be made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If, through neglect or blindness, be foregone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The glorious Fortune, which for you has stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She her bald front, as now her hair, will show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To our long infamy and mighty woe.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Thus warily the Spanish king replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proving by this and other argument,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moorish squadrons should in France abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till Charlemagne was into exile sent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But King Sobrino, he that plainly spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The scope whereon Marsilius was intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To public good preferring private gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So spake in answer to the king of Spain:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“My liege, when I to peace exhorted you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would that my prophecy had proved less just!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of, if I was to prove a prophet true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye in Sobrino had reposed more trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than in King Rodomont and in that crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alzirdo, Martasine and Marbalust!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom I would here see gladly, front to front;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But see most gladly boastful Rodomont.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>“To twit that warrior with his threat, ‘to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By France, what by the brittle glass is done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And throughout heaven and hell your course pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yea, (as the monarch said) your course outrun.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet lapt in foul and loathsome ease, while you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So need his help, lies Ulien’s lazy son;<a/><!--Footnote--></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I, that as a coward was decried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For my true prophecy, am at your side,</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>“And ever will be while this life I bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, albeit ’tis with yours sore laden, still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Daily for you is risked with them that are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The best of France; and⁠—be he who he will⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is not mortal living who will dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To say Sobrino’s deeds were ever ill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yea, many who vaunt more, amid your host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have not so much, nay lighter, cause for boast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>“I speak, these words to show that what whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I said and say again, has neither sprung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From evil heart, nor is the fruit of fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that true love and duty move my tongue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You homeward with what haste you may to steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I counsel, your assembled bands among;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For little is the wisdom of that wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who risks his own to gain another’s right.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“If there be gain, ye know, Late thirty-two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your vassal kings, with you our sails we spread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, if we pause to sum the account anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hardly a third survives; the rest are dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May it please Heaven no further loss ensue!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if you will pursue your quest, I dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest not a fourth nor fifth will soon remain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wholly spent will be your wretched train.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Orlando’s absence so far aids, that where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our troops are few, there haply <em>none</em> would be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not through this removed our perils are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though it prolongs our evil destiny.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold Rinaldo! whom his deeds declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less than bold Orlando; of his tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There are the shoots; with paladin and peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our baffled Saracens’ eternal fear;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>“And the other Mars (albeit against my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It goes to waste my praise upon a foe);</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I speak of the redoubted Brandimart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose feats no less than fierce Orlando’s show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose mighty prowess I have proved in part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In part, at others’ cost I see and know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then many days Orlando has been gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet we have lost more fields than we have won.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“I fear, if heretofore our band has lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A heavier forfeit will henceforth be paid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blotted is Mandricardo from our host;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Martial Gradasso hath withdrawn his aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa, at our worst, has left her post;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So Argier’s lord; of whom it may be said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he as true as strong, we should not need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso and the Tartar king, to speed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“While aids like these are lost to our array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While on our side such slaughtered thousands lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those looked-for are arrived, nor on her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is any vessel fraught with new supply⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charles has been joined by four, that, as they say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might with Orlando or Rinaldo vie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With reasons, for from hence to Bactrian shore,<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill would you hope to find such other four.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“I know not if you know who Guido are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sansonet, and the sons of Olivier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For these I more respect, more fear I bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than any warlike duke or cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Almàyn’s or of other lineage fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for the Roman empire rests the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though I misrate not those of newer stamp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, to our scathe, are gathered in their camp.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“As often as ye issue on the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worsted so oft, or broken, shall you be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If oft united Africa and Spain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were losers, when sixteen to eight were we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What will ensue, when banded with Almàyn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are England, Scotland, France, and Italy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When with our six twice six their weapons cross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What else can we expect but shame and loss?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>“You lose your people <em>here</em>, and <em>there</em> your reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If you in this emprise are obstinate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Returning⁠—us, the remnant of your train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You save, together with your royal state.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It were ill done to leave the king of Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since all for this would hold you sore ingrate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet there’s a remedy in peace; which, so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It pleases but yourself, will please the foe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“But, if, as first defeated, on your part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seems a shame to offer peace, and ye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have war and wasteful battle more at heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waged hitherto with what success you see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least to gain the victory use art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which may be yours, if you are ruled by me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lay all our quarrel’s trial on one peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let Rogero be that cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Such our Rogero is, ye know and I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That⁠—pitted one to one in listed fight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not Roland, not Rinaldo stands more high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor whatsoever other Christian knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But would ye kindle warfare far and nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though superhuman be that champion’s might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior is but one mid many spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Matched singly with a host of martial peers.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Meseemeth, if to you it seemeth good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye should propose to Charles the war to end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that, to spare the constant waste of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which his, and countless of your warriors spend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He⁠—by a knight of yours to be withstood⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A champion, chosen from his best should send;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those two all the warfare wage alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till one prevails, and one is overthrown;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“On pact the king, whose champion in the just</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is loser, tribute to that other pay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor will this pact displease King Charles, I trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though <em>his</em> was the advantage in the fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then of his arms Rogero so robust</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I deem, that he will surely win the day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would prevail (so certain is our right)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though Mars himself should be his opposite.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>With these and other sayings yet more sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So wrought Sobrino, he his end obtained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on that day interpreters were found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they that day to Charles their charge explained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charles, whom such matchless cavaliers surround.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believes the battle is already gained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And chooses good Rinaldo for the just,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next to Orlando in his sovereign’s trust.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>In this accord like cause for pleasure find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well the Christian as the paynim foe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, harassed sore in body and in mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those warriors all were weary, all were woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each in repose and quietude designed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To pass what time remained to him below:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each cursed the senseless anger and the hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which stirred their hearts to discord and debate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo felt himself much magnified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Charles, for what in him so strong weighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More trusted him than all his court beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And glad the honoured enterprise assayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero he esteemed not in his pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thought he ill could keep him from his blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor deemed the Child could equal him in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit he slew in strife the Tartar knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero, though much honoured, on his part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That him his king has chosen from the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom a trust so weighty to impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As of his many martial lords the best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet shows a troubled face; not that the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that good knight unworthy fears molest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only none Rinaldo would have bred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, with Orlando leagued, he would not dread⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>But because sister of the Christian knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(He knows) is she, his consort true and dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That to the stripling evermore did write,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As one sore injured by that cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, if to ancient sins he should unite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mortal combat with Montalban’s peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her, although loving, will he anger so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not lightly she her hatred will forego.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>If silently Rogero made lament</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he in his despite must battle do;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In sobs his consort dear to hers gave vent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When shortly to her ears the tidings flew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She beat her breast, her golden tresses rent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fast, scalding tears her innocent cheeks bedew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She taxes young Rogero as ingrate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And aye cries out upon her cruel fate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Nought can result to Bradamant but pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whatever is the doubtful combat’s end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She will not think Rogero can be slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this, ’twould seem, her very heart would rend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And should our Lord the fall of France ordain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><em>That</em> kingdom for more sins than one to amend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gentle maid, beside a brother’s loss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have to weep a worse and bitterer cross.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>For, without shame and scorn, she never may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not without hatred of her kin combined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her loved lord return in such a way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that it may be known of all mankind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As, thinking upon this by night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She oftentimes had purposed in her mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so by promise both were tied withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Room for repentance and retreat was small.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But she, that ever, when things adverse were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With faithful succour Bradamant had stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say the weird Melissa, could not bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hear the wailings of the woeful maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She hurried to console her in her care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And proffered succour in due time and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“She would disturb that duel ’twixt the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The occasion of such grief and cruel pain.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile their weapons for the future fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero and Duke Aymon’s son prepared;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The choice whereof with that good warrior lay,<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Roman empire’s knight by Charles declared;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, like one that ever from the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He lost his goodly steed afoot had fared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made choice, afoot and fenced with plate and mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His foe with axe and dagger to assail.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Whether Chance moved Mountalban’s martial lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Malagigi, provident and sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That knew how young Rogero’s charmed sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cleft helm and hauberk in its greedy rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One and the other warrior made accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As said) without their faulchions to engage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The place of combat chosen by that twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was near old Arles, upon a spacious plain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Watchful Aurora hardly from the bower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of old Tithonus hath put forth her head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To give beginning to the day and hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prefixed and ordered for that duel dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When deputies from either hostile power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On this side and on that forth issuing, spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tents at each entrance of the lists; and near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The two pavillions, both, an altar rear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>After short pause, was seen upon the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim host in different squadrons dight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rich in barbarick pomp, amid that train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rode Africk’s monarch, ready armed for fight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bay was the steed he backed, with sable mane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two of his legs were pied, his forehead white.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fast beside Agramant, Rogero came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him to serve Marsilius thought no shame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The casque that he from Mandricardo wrung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In single combat with such travel sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The casque that (as in loftier strain is sung)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cased Hector’s head, a thousand years before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marsilius carried, by his side, among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Princes and lords, that severally bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other harness of Rogero bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enriched with precious pearls and rough with gold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>On the other part, without his camp appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charles, with his men at arms in squadrons dight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in such order led his cavaliers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As they would keep, if marshalled for the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fenced is the monarch with his famous peers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with him wends, all armed, Montalban’s knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed, save his helmet, erst Mambrino’s casque;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To carry which is Danish Ogier’s task;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>And, of two axes, hath Duke Namus one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Salamon the other: Charlemagne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is to <em>this</em> side, with all his following, gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To <em>that</em> wend those of Africk and of Spain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the mid space between the hosts is none;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Empty remains large portion of the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he is doomed to death who thither goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By joint proclaim, except the chosen foes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>After the second choice of arms was made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him, the champion of the paynim clan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither two priests of either sect conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two books; <em>that</em>, carried by one holy man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Him of our law⁠—Christ’s perfect life displayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those others’ volume was their Alcoran.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The emperor in his hands the Gospel took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king of Africa that other book.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Charlemagne, at his altar, to the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lifted his hands, “O God, that for our sake”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Exclaimed the monarch) “wast content to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thyself a ransom for our sins to make;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—O thou that found such favour in his eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That God from thee the flesh of man did take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Borne for nine months within thy holy womb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While aye thy virgin flower preserved its bloom,</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Hear, and be witnesses of what I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For me and those that after me shall reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Agramant and those that heir his sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I twenty loads of gold of perfect grain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will every year deliver, if to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My champion vanquished in the lists remain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vow I will straightway from warfare cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from henceforth maintain perpetual peace;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“And may your joint and fearful wrath descend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On me forthwith, if I my word forego!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And may it me and mine alone offend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And none beside, amid this numerous show!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That all in briefest time may comprehend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My breach of promise has brought down the woe.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So saying, in his hand the holy book</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charles held, and fixed on heaven his earnest look.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>This done, they seek that altar, sumptuously</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Decked for the purpose, by the pagan train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where their king swears, “that he will pass the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all his army, to his Moorish reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to King Charles will tributary be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If vanquished, young Rogero shall remain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And will observe the truce for evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the pact declared by Charles before;”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And like him, nor in under tone, he swears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calling on Mahound to attest his oath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the volume which his pontiff bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To observe what he has promised plights his troth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to his side each hastily repairs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mid their several powers are harboured both.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next these, to swear arrive the champions twain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this the promise which their oaths contain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero pledges first his knightly word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Should <em>his</em> king mar, or send to mar, the fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He him no more as leader or as lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will serve, but wholly Charlemagne obey.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Rinaldo⁠—“if in breach of their accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him from the field King Charles would bear away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till one or the other is subdued in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he will be the Moorish monarch’s knight.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When ended are the ceremonies, here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there, to seek their camps the two divide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor long, therein delayed; when trumpets clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The time for their encounter signified:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now to the charge advanced each cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Measuring with cautious care his every stride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! the assault begins; now low, now high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That pair the sounding steel in circles ply.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Now with the axe’s blade, now with its heel<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their strokes they at the head or foot address;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these so skilfully and nimbly deal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As needs must shock all credence to express.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Child, that at <em>her</em> brother aims the steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who doth his miserable soul possess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Evermore with such caution strikes his blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he is deemed less vigorous than his foe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>Rather to parry then to smite intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He know not what to wish; that low should lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, would Rogero ill content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor willingly the Child by him would die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But here I am at my full line’s extent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where I must needs defer my history.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In other canto shall the rest appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If you that other canto please to hear.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
