<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-16" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Gryphon finds traitorous Origilla nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Damascus city, with Martano vile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slaughtered the Saracens and Christians lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By thousands and by thousands heaped this while;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if the Moor outside of Paris die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the Sarzan so destroys each pile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such slaughter deals, that greater ill than this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never before has been exprest, I wiss.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Love’s penalties are manifold and dread:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of which I have endured the greater part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, to my cost, in these so well am read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I can speak of them as ’twere my art.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence if I say, or if I ever said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Did speech or living page my thoughts impart)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“One ill is grievous and another light.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yield me belief, and deem my judgment right.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>I say, I said, and, while I live, will say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“He, who is fettered by a worthy chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though his desire his lady should gainsay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, every way averse, his suit disdain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though Love deprive him of all praised pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After long time and trouble spent in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, if his heart be placed well worthily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Needs not lament though he should waste and die.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Let him lament, who plays a slavish part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom two bright eyes and lovely tresses please:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath which beauties lurks a wanton heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With little that is pure, and much of lees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wretch would fly; but bears in him a dart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like wounded stag, whichever way he flees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dares not confess, yet cannot quench, his flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of himself and worthless love has shame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>The youthful Gryphon finds him in this case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who sees the error which he cannot right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sees how vilely he his heart does place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On faithless Origille, his vain delight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet evil use doth sovereign reason chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And free will is subdued by appetite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though a foul mind the lady’s actions speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her, wheresoe’er she is, must Gryphon seek.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>Resuming the fair history, I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of the city he in secret rode;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor to his brother would his plan bewray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who oft on him had vain reproof bestowed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to the left t’wards Ramah shaped his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the most level and most easy road.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him six days’ journey to Damascus brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence, setting out anew, he Antioch sought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>He nigh Damascus met the lover, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perfidious Origilla’s heart possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And matched in evil customs were the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like stalk and flower: for that in either’s breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was lodged a fickle heart; the dame untrue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he a traitor whom she loved the best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While both the lovers hid their nature base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To others’ cost, beneath a courteous face.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>As I relate to you, the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came on huge courser, trapped with mickle pride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With faithless Origille, in gorgeous gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With gold embroidered, and with azure dyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two ready knaves, who serve the warrior, rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knightly helm and buckler at his side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As one who with fair pomp and semblance went</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards Damascus, to a tournament.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Damascus’ king a splendid festival</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had in these days bid solemnly proclaim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with what pomp they could, upon his call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, in shining arms, the champions came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At Gryphon’s sight the harlot’s spirits fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who fears that he will work her scathe and shame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knows her lover has not force and breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To save her from Sir Gryphon, threatening death;</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>But like most cunning and audacious quean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although she quakes from head to foot with fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her voice so strengthens, and so shapes her mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in her face no signs of dread appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having already made her leman ween</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The trick devised, she feigns a joyous cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards Sir Gryphon goes, and for long space</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hangs on his neck, fast-locked in her embrace.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>She, after suiting with much suavity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The action to the word, sore weeping, cried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Dear lord, is this the guerdon due to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For love and worship? that I should abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone one live long year, deprived of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—A second near⁠—and, yet upon thy side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No grief?⁠—and had I borne for thee to stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not if I should have seen that day.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>“When I from Nicosia thee expected</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(When thou wast journeying to the plenar court)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To cheer me⁠—left with fever sore infected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the dread of death⁠—I heard report</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou wast gone to Syria; and dejected</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By that ill tiding, suffered in such sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, all unable to pursue thy quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had nigh with this right hand transfixt my breast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>“But fortune, by her double bounty, shows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She guards me more than thou: me to convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She sent my brother here, who with me goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My honour safe in his protecting stay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this encounter with thee now bestows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which I above all other blessings weigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in good time; for hadst thou longer stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My lord, I should have died of hope delayed.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The wicked woman, full of subtlety</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Worse than a fox in crafty hardihood)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursues, and so well shapes her history,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She wholly throws the blame on Gryphon good;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes him believe that other not to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her kin alone, but of her flesh and blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Got by one father;⁠—and so puts upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight, that he less credits Luke and John.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor he the fraud of her, more false than fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Only forbore with just reproach to pay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor only did the threatened stranger spare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was the lover of that lady gay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But deemed to excuse himself sufficient were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turning some portion of the blame away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as the real brother she profest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unceasingly the lady’s knight carest;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>And to Damascus, with the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returned, who to Sir Gryphon made report,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Syria’s wealthy king, with sumptuous cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within that place would hold a splendid court;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who, baptized or infidel, appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There at his tourney (of whatever sort),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within the city and without, assures</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From wrong, for all the time the feast endures.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet I of Origilla’s treachery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall not so steadfastly pursue the lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, famed not for one single perfidy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thousands and thousands had betrayed before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that I will return again to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two hundred thousand wretched men or more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Burnt by the raging wild-fire, where they spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About the walls of Paris, scathe and dread.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>I left you where king Agramant prepared</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To storm a gate, and to the assault was gone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This he had hoped to find without a guard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And work elsewhere to bar the way was none.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For there, in person, Charles kept watch and ward</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With many, practised warriors every one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two Angelines, two Guidos, Angelier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Avino, Avolio, Otho, and Berlinghier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>One and the other host its worth, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charles and king Agramant, desire to show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where praise, where riches are, they think, in store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For those that do their duty on the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But such were not the atchievements of the Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to repair the loss; for, to his woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full many a Saracen the champaign prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose folly was a beacon to the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The frequent darts a storm of hail appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from the city-wall the Christians fling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The deafening clamours put the heavens in fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, from our part, and from that other, ring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Charles and Agramant must wait; for here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I of the Mars of Africa will sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Rodomont, that fierce and fearful man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That through the middle of the city ran.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>I know not, sir, if you the adventure dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that so daring Moor to mind recall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The leader, who had left his people dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between the second work and outer wall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon those limbs the ravening fire so fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was never sight more sad!⁠—I told withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How vaulting o’er that hindrance at a bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He cleared the moat which girt the city round.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>When he was known the thickening crowd among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the strange arms he wore and scaly hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There, where the aged sires and feebler throng.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Listened to each new tale on every side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaven-high groan, moan, and lamentation rung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And loud they beat their lifted palms and cried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While those who had the strength to fly aloof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sought safety not from house or temple’s roof.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>But this the cruel sword concedes to few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So brandished by that Saracen robust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here, with half a leg dissevered, flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A foot, there head divided from the bust:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This cleft across, and that behold him hew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From head to hips, so strong the blow and just.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While, of the thousands wounded by the Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is none that shows an honest scar before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>What by weak herd, in fields of Hircany,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tiger does, or Indian Ganges near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or wolf, by lamb or kid, on heights which lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On Typheus’ back, the cruel cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now executes on those, I will not, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Call phalanxes or squadrons, but a mere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rabble, that I should term a race forlorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who but deserved to die ere they were born.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Of all he cuts, and thrusts, and maims, and bleeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is not one who looks him in the face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout that street, which in a straight line leads</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up to <abbr>St.</abbr> Michael’s bridge, so thronged a space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont, terrible and fearful, speeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whirling his bloody brand, nor grants he grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his career, to servant or to lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saint and sinner feel alike the sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Religion cannot for the priest bespeak</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mercy, nor innocence avail the child:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor gently beaming eyes, nor vermeil cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Protect the blooming dame or damsel mild.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Age smites its breast and flies: while bent to wreak</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vengeance, the Saracen, with gore defiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shows not his valour more than cruel rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heedless alike of order, sex, and age.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor the impious king alone with human blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Lord of the impious he⁠—his hand distains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But even on walls so sorely vents his mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fires fair houses, and polluted fanes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The houses almost all were made of wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then (as ’tis told) and this, by what remains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May be believed; for yet in Paris we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Six out of ten no better builded see.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Though flames demolish all things far and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This ill appears his furious hate to slake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where’er the paynim has his hands applied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He tumbles down a roof at every shake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My lord, believe, you never yet espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bombard in Padua, of so large a make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it could rend from wall of battered town</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What, at a single pull, the king plucked down.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>While the accursed man, amid the rout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So warred with fire and sword, if at his post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Agramant had prest it from without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ample city had that day been lost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he was hindered by the warrior stout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who came from England with the advancing host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Composed of English and of Scotch allied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Silence and the Angel for their guide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>It was God’s will, that while through town and tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The furious Rodomont such ruin spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither arrived Rinaldo, Clermont’s flower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Three leagues above, he o’er the river’s bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had cast a bridge; from whence his English power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the left-hand by crooked ways he led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, meaning to assail the barbarous foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stream no obstacle might interpose.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo had, with Edward, sent a force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Six thousand strong, of archer infantry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sped, with Ariman, two thousand horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of lightest sort; and foot and cavalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sought Paris by those roads, which have their course</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Directly to, and from, the Picard sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That by <abbr>St.</abbr> Martin’s and <abbr>St.</abbr> Denys’ gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They might convey the aid the burghers wait.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo sent with these the baggage train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And carriages, with which his troops were stored;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fetching, with the forces that remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A compass, he the upper way explored.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bridge, and boat, and means to pass the Seine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had with him; for it here was ill to ford.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He past his army, broke the bridges down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rank’d in line the bands of either crown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>But having first the peers and captains wheeled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About him in a ring, the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mounted the bank which overtopt the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So much, that all might plainly see and hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cried, “My lords, you should thanksgiving yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With lifted hands, to God, who brought you here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through whom, o’er every nation, you may gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eternal glory, bought with little pain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Two princes, by your means, will rescued be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If you relieve those city gates from siege;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, your own king, whom you from slavery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And death to save, a subject’s vows oblige;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a famed emperor, of more majesty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than ever yet in court was served by liege,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with them other kings, and dukes, and peers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lords of other lands, and cavaliers.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“So that one city saving, not alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will the Parisians bless your helping hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, sadder than for sorrows of their own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Timid, afflicted, and disheartened stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And their unhappy wives and children moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which share in the same peril, and the band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or virgins, dedicate to heavenly spouse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest this day frustrate see their holy vows;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>—“I say, this city saved from deadly wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only will Parisians hold you dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But habitants of all the countries round:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor speak I only of the nations near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For city there is none on Christian ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But what has citizens beleaguered here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that to you, for vanquishing the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More lands than France will obligation owe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“If him the ancients with a crown endued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who saved one citizen by worthy deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For rescuing such a countless multitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What recompense shall be your worthy meed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if, from jealousy or sloth, so good</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And holy, enterprise should ill succeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believe me, only while these walls endure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is Italy or Almayn’s realm secure;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Or any other part, where men adore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, who for us upon the cross was hung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor think that distance saves you from the Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor deem your island strong, the waves among.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if, from far Gibraltar’s straits of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And old Alcides’ pillars, sailed the throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bear off plunder from your sea-girt strands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What will they do when they possess our lands?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And, if in this fair enterprise arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No gain, no glory served you as a guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A common debt enjoins you mutual aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Militant here upon one Church’s side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moreover, let not any be afraid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our broken foemen will the assault abide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who seem to me ill-taught in warlike art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A feeble rabble without arms or heart.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Such reasons, and yet better for, that need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might good Rinaldo in his speech infer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with quick phrase and voice, to valiant deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The high-minded barons and bold army stir;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this was but to goad a willing steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As the old proverb says) who lacks no spur.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He moved the squadrons, having closed his speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Softly, beneath their separate banners, each.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>He, without clamour, without any noise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So moves his triple host, their flags below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino, marching by the stream, enjoys</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The honour first to assail the barbarous foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paladin the Irishmen employs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More inland, with a wider wheel to go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus England’s horse and foot, the two between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Led by the Duke of Lancaster, are seen.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>The paladin rode on, along the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he had put the warriors in their way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, passing by their squadrons, pricked before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Valiant Zerbino and his whole array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he reached the quarters of the Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Oran’s king, and king Sobrino lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, half-a-mile removed from those of Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Posted upon that side, observed the plain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>With such a faithful escort fortified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sure, the Christians who had thither wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Silence and the Angel for their guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No longer could stand mute or keep their ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But hearing now the foe, with shouts defied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their host, and made the shrilling trumpets sound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with loud clamours, which Heaven’s concave fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sent through the paynim’s bones a deadly chill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo spurs before the troops combined</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His foaming courser, and his weapon rests;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a full bow-shot leaves the Scots behind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So all delay the impatient peer molests.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As oftentimes an eddying gust of winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Issues, ere yet the horrid storm infests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So sallying swiftly from the following herd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo forth upon Baiardo spurred.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>As the aspect of the paladin of France,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wavering Moorish files betray their fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, trembling in their hands, is seen the lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their thighs and stirrups quivering, like the spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Pulian only marks the knight’s advance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knowing Rinaldo not, unchanged in cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor thinking such a cruel shock to meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gallops against him on his courser fleet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>He stoops upon the weapon which he strains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whole and collected for the martial game:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to his horse abandoning the reins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And goading with both spurs the courser, came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the other side no valour feigns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But shows, by doings, what he is in name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—With what rare grace and matchless art he wars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The son of Aymon, rather son of Mars.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Well-matched in skill, they aimed their cruel blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With lances at each other’s heads addrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill matched, in arms and valour, were the foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this past on, and that the champaigne prest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More certain proof of worth, when warriors close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There needs than knightly lance, well placed in rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Fortune even more than Valour needs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which ill, without her saving succour, speeds.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>With the good spear new levelled in his fist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At Oran’s king behold Rinaldo dart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of bulk, and bone, and sinew, to resist</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch was, but ill supplied with heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his might pass for a fair stroke in list,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though planted in the buckler’s nether part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let those excuse it who refuse to admire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since the good paladin could reach no higher.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor did the buckler so the weapon stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though made of palm within, and steel without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that it pierced the paunch, and made a way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To let that mean and ill matched spirit out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The courser, who had deemed that all the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He must so huge a burden bear about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thanked in his heart the warrior, who well met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had thus preserved him from so sore a sweat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo, having broke his rested spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So wheels his horse, he seems equipt with wings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, turning swiftly with the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid the closest crowd, impetuous springs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Composed of brittle glass the arms appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Sir Rinaldo red Fusberta swings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor tempered steel is there, nor corslet thick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which keeps the sword from biting to the quick.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet few the tempered plates or iron pins</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With which encounters that descending brand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But targets, some of oak and some of skins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And quilted vest and turban’s twisted band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lightly such drapery good Rinaldo thins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cleaves, and bores, and shears, on either hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor better from his sword escapes the swarm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than grass from sweeping scythe, or grain from storm.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>The foremost squadron had been put to flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When thither the vanguard Zerbino led.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forth pricking from the following crowd, in sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared, with levelled lance, their youthful head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With no less fury those who trooped to fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath his banner, to the combat sped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like lions, like so many wolves, who leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fury to the assault of goat or sheep.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>Both spurred their coursers on, with rested lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When either warrior to his foe was near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that short interval, that small expanse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of plain, between, was seen to disappear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was never witnessed yet a stranger dance!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the Scots only ply the murderous spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Only the scattered paynims slaughtered lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if conducted thither but to die.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>It seemed as if each coward paynim grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More cold than ice, each Scot more fierce than flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moors believed that with Rinaldo’s thew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And muscle fortified, each Christian came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobrino quickly moved his ordered crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor stayed till herald should his call proclaim:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better were they than those which went before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For captain, armour, and for martial lore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Less worthless men of Africa were they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though ill had they been deemed of much avail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill harnessed, and worse trained to martial fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith King Dardinel, the foe to assail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moved up his host, himself in helmet gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sheathing all his limbs in plate and mail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fourth division I believe was best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, under Isolier, to battle prest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>Thraso, this while, the valiant Duke of Mar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Glad in the tumult, for the cavaliers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who muster in his train, uplifts the bar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the lists of fame his following chears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Isolier, with horsemen of Navarre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Entered in that fierce fray he sees and hears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next Ariodantes moved his chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was of late made Duke of Albany.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The deep sonorous trumpet’s bellowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sound of drum, and barbarous instrument,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Combined with twang of bow, and whiz of sling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wheel and machine, and stone from engine sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (what more loud than these appeared to ring)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tumult, and shriek, and groan, and loud lament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Composed a direr whole than what offends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The neighbouring tribes where deafening Nile descends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The arrows’ double shower the ample sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With wide-extended shade is seen to shrowd;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Breath, smoke of sweat and dust ascend on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seem to stamp in air a murky cloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By turns each host gives way, and you might spy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now chasing, now in flight, the self-same crowd;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here some wight, beside his foeman slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or little distant, prostrate on the plain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When, harassed with fatigue, a wearied crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Withdraw, fresh files their fellows reinforce:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Men, here and there, the wasted ranks renew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here march supplies of foot, and there of horse:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her mantle green for robe of crimson hue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Earth shifts, ensanguined where the warriors course:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there were azure flowers and yellow sprung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now slaughtered men lie stretched their steeds among.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Zerbino was more wonders seen to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than ever stripling of his age, he strowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ground with heaps of dead, and overthrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim numbers which about him flowed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The valiant Ariodantes to his new-</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Entrusted squadron mighty prowess showed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Filling with dread and wonder, near and far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The squadrons of Castile and of Navarre.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>Chelindo and Mosco (bastards were the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Calabrun, late king of Arragon),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one esteemed among the valiant train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calamidor, of Barcellona’s town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving their standards, in the hope to gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By young Zerbino’s death, a glorious force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wounded in his flanks the prince’s horse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Pierced by three lances lay the courser strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But bold Zerbino quickly rose anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, eager to avenge his charger’s wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The assailants, where he sees them, will pursue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino at Mosco first, that overhung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, in the hope to make him prisoner, flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pierced him in the flank; who from his sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pallid and cold, upon the champaign fell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>When him so killed, as ’twere by stealthy blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chelindo viewed, to avenge his brother slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He charged, intent the prince to overthrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he seized fast his courser by the rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, thence to rise not, laid the charger low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Destined no more to feed on hay or grain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For at one stroke, so matchless was his force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino cleft the rider and his horse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When that fell blow Calamidor espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He turned the bridle short to speed away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But him with downright cut Zerbino plied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind, and cried withal, “Stay, traitor, stay.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor from its aim the sword-stroke wandered wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though from the mark it went somedeal astray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The falchion missed the rider as he fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But reached the horse’s croup, and stretched him dead,</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>He quits the horse, and thence for safety crawls;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he with little boot escapes his foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him Duke Thraso’s horse o’erturns and mawls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Opprest the ponderous courser’s weight below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the huge crowd upon Zerbino falls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ariodantes and Lurcanio go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with them many a cavalier and count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who do their best Zerbino to remount.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Then Artalico and Margano knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The force of Ariodantes’ circling brand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While Casimir and Enearco rue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More deeply yet the puissance of his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote by the knight, escaped the former two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The others were left dead upon the strand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lurcanio shows what are his force and breath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who charges, smites, o’erturns, and puts to death.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Sir, think not that more inland on the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warfare is less mortal than along</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stream, nor that the troops behind remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to the duke of Lancaster belong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He valiantly assailed the flags of Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And long in even scale the battle hung.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Horse and Foot, and Captains of those bands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On either side, could deftly ply their hands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Forward Sir Oldrad pricks and Fieramont;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This Glocester’s duke, and York’s the other knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With them conjoined is Richard, Warwick’s count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the bold duke of Clarence, Henry hight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These Follicon and Matalista front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Baricond, with all they lead to fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Almeria this, and that Granada guides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And o’er Marjorca Baricond presides.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Well matched awhile the Christian and the Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared, without advantage in the fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not this, now that gave ground, like corn before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The light and fickle breeze which blows in May:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or as the sea which ripples on the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still comes and goes, nor keeps one certain way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When hollow Fortune thus had sported long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She proved disastrous to the paynim throng.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The duke of Glocester Matalista bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assailed this while, and hurtled from his sell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fieramont Follicon o’erturned and rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the right shoulder smit, on earth as well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The advancing English either paynim hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bear their prisoners off to dungeon cell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while, Sir Baricond is, in the strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Clarence’s bold duke deprived of life.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Hence ’tis among the Moors amazement all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While hence the Christians take such heart and pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bands do nought but quit their ground and fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And break their order on the Paynim side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time the Christian troops come on, and gall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their flying rants, which nowhere will abide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had not one arrived to aid their host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Paynim camp had on that side been lost.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>But Ferrau, who till this time ever nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marsilius, scarce had quitted him that day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When half destroyed he marked his chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw that baffled banner born away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pricked his good courser forth, in time to spy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Where mid those squadrons hottest waxed the fray)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his head severed in a griesly wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olympio de la Serra fall to ground:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>A stripling he, who such sweet musick vented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accorded to the horned lyre’s soft tone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That at the dulcet melody relented</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hearer’s heart, though harder than a stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Happy! if, with such excellence contented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had pursued so fair a fame alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And loathed shield, quiver, helmet, sword and lance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Destined by these to die a youth in France.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When bold French beheld his cruel plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For whom he love and much esteem profest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He felt more pity at the doleful sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than, ‘mid those thousands slain, for all the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And smote the foe who slew him with such might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he his helm divided from the crest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cut front, eyes, visage, and mid bosom through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cast him down amid the slaughtered crew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor stops he here, nor leaves a corslet whole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor helm unbroken, where his sword is plied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of this the front or cheek, of that the poll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The arm of other foe his strokes divide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, of these divorcing body and soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Restores the wavering battle on that side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence the disheartened and ignoble throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are scattered wide, and broke, and driven along.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Into the medley pricks King Agramant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desirous there his bloody course to run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him King Baliverzo, Farurant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Soridan, Bambirago, Prusion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next so many more of little vaunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose blood will form a lake ere day be done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I could count each leaf with greater ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When autumn of their mantle strips the trees.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Agramant from the wall a numerous band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of horse and foot withdraws, and sends the array</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the king of Fez, with a command</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind the Moorish tents to make his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those of Ireland in their march withstand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he sees hurrying with what haste they may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with wide wheel and spacious compass wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fall upon the paynim camp behind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The king of Fez upon this service prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all delay might sore his work impede.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while King Agramant unites the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And parts the troops who to the battle speed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sought himself the river, where he guessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moorish host might most his presence need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, from that quarter, had a courier prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By King Sobrino sent, the monarch’s aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He more than half his camp behind him led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In one deep phalanx. At the mighty sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone, the Scotsmen trembled, and in dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abandoned honour, order, and their ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lurcanio, Ariodantes, and their head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino, there alone the torrent bound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And haply he, who was afoot, had died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that in time his need Rinaldo spied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Elsewhere the paladin was making fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hundred banners: while the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So chased the quailing Saracens, the cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of young Zerbino’s peril smote the ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, single and afoot, his chivalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid the Africans had left the peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo turned about and took his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he beheld the Scots in disarray.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>He plants his courser, where their squadrons yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the fierce paynims, and exclaims: “Where go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your bands, and why so basely quit the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yielding so vilely to so vile a foe?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold the promised trophies, spear and shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spoils which your loaded churches ought to show!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What praise! what glory! that alone, and reft</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his good horse, your monarch’s son is left!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>He from a squire receives a lance, and spies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Prusion little distant, sovereign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the Alvaracchiae, and against him hies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he unhorses, dead upon the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So Agricalt, so Bambirago dies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next sore wounded is Sir Soridane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had been slain as well amid the throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If good Rinaldo’s lance had proved more strong.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>That weapon broken, he Fusberta rears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And smites Sir Serpentine, him of the star.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though charmed from mischief are the cavalier’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Good arms, he falls astounded by the jar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus Rinaldo round Zerbino clears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The field so widely, where those champions war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That without more dispute he takes a horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those, who masterless, at random, course.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>That he in time remounted it was well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who haply would not, if he more delayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Agramant at once, and Dardinel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobrino, and Balastro thither made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he, who had in time regained the sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wheeled, here and there his horse, with brandished blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dispatching into hell the mixt array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That how men live above their ghosts might say.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The good Rinaldo, who to overthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The strongest of the foeman covets still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At Agramant directs a deadly blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Who seems too passing-proud, and greater ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Works there, than thousand others of the foe⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And spurs his horse, the Moorish chief to spill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He smote the monarch, broadside charged the steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And man and horse reversed upon the mead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>What time, without, in such destructive frays</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hate, Rage, and Fury, all offend by turns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Paris Rodomont the people slays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And costly house, and holy temple burns:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While Charles elsewhere anther duty stays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who nothing hears of this, nor aught discerns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, in the town, receives the British band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Edward and Sir Ariman command.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>To him a squire approached, who pale with dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarce drew his breath, and cried: “Oh, well away!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! alas!” (and thus he often said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere he could utter aught beside). “To-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To-day, sire, is the Roman empire sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Christ to the heathen makes his flock a prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fiend from air to-day has dropt, that none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Henceforth may in this city make their won.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Satan (in sooth, it can no other be)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Destroys and ruins the unhappy town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turn, and the curling wreaths of vapour see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the red flames which wander up and down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">List to those groans, and be they warrantry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the sad news thy servant now makes known!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One the fair city wastes with sword and fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before whose vengeful fury all retire.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Even such as he, who hears the tumult wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And clatter of church-bells, ere he espy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The raging fire, concealed from none beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself, to him most dangerous, and most nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such was King Charles; who heard, and then descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The new disaster with his very eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence he the choicest of his meiny steers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, where he the cry and tumult hears.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>With many peers and chiefs, who worthiest are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Summoned about him, Charlemagne is gone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bids direct his standards to the square</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither the paynim had repaired; hears groan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tumult, spies the horrid tokens there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of cruelty, sees human members strown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—No more⁠—Let him return another time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who willingly will listen to this rhyme.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
