<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-21" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>CANTO 21</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Zerbino for Gabrina, who a heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of asp appears to bear, contends. O'erthrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Fleming falls upon the other part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through cause of that despised and odious crone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wounded sore, and writhing with the smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beldam's treason to the prince makes known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose scorn and hatred hence derive new force.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards loud cries Zerbino spurs his horse.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>No cord I well believe is wound so tight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Round chest, nor nails the plank so fastly hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Faith enwraps an honourable sprite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In its secure, inextricable, fold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor holy Faith, it seems, except in white</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was mantled over in the days of old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So by the ancient limner ever painted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As by one speck, one single blemish tainted.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Faith should be kept unbroken evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With one or with a thousand men united;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well if given in grot or forest hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remote from town and hamlet, as if plighted</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid a crowd of witnesses, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tribunal, and in act and deed recited:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor needs the solemn sanction of an oath:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It is sufficient that we pledge our troth.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>And this maintains as it maintained should be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In each emprize the Scottish cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gives good proof of his fidelity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quitting his road with that old crone to steer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although this breeds the youth such misery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As 'twould to have Disease itself as near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or even Death; but with him heavier weighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That his desire the promise he had made.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>Of him I told who felt at heart such load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reflecting she beneath his charge must go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spake no word; and thus in silent mode</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both fared: so sullen was Zerbino's woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I said how vexed their silence, as they rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was broke, when Sol his hindmost wheels did show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By an adventurous errant cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in mid pathway met the crone and peer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>The hag, who the approaching warrior knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Hermonides of Holland he was hight)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That bore upon a field of sable hue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A bar of vermeil tint, transversely dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did humbly now to good Zerbino sue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Her pride abased, and look of haught despite —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him reminded of the promise made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When her Marphisa to his care conveyed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>Because as foe to her and hers she knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight they were encountering, who had slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her only brother and her father true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was advised, the traitor would be fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By her, the remnant of her race, to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What he had perpetrated on the twain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Woman, while guarded by my arm (he said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will not thou shouldst any danger dread."</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>As nearer now, the stranger knight espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That face, which was so hateful in his sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With menacing and savage voice he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Either with me prepare thyself to fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or arm thee not on that old woman's side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who by my hand shall perish, as is right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thou contendest for her, thou art slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such their portion is who wrong maintain."</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Him young Zerbino answered courteously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Twas sign of evil and ungenerous will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And corresponded not with chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he a woman should desire to kill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet if the knight persists, he will not flee —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But bids him well consider first how ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twould sound, that he, a gentle knight and good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should wish to dip his hand in woman's blood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>This and yet more he vainly says; nor stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They idle long; from word they pass to deed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having compassed on the level land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enough of ground, encounter on the mead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not fired in some rejoicing, from the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discharged, so fast the whistling rockets speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the two coursers bear the cavaliers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hurtle in mid space with rested spears.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>Hermonides of Holland levelled low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for the youth's left flank the stroke intended;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But his weak lance was shivered by the blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And little the opposing Scot offended:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But vain was not the spear-thrust of his foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who bored his opposite's good shield, and rended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His shoulder, by the lance pierced through and through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And good Hermonides on earth o'erthrew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>Thinking him slain who only lay amazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By pity prest, Zerbino leapt to ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from his deathlike face the vizor raised;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, as wakened out of sleep profound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In silence, hard upon Zerbino gazed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then cried, "It does not me, in truth, confound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To think that I am overthrown by thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who seem'st the flower of errant chivalry.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>"But it with reason grieves me this is done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon account of a false woman's spite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose wicked cause I know not why you own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An office ill according with your might:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when to you the occasion shall be known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which urges me her wickedness to quite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whene'er you think on it, you will repent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How she by you was saved, and I was shent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And if enough of breath, although I fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The contrary, is left me to expound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her evil actions, I shall make appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She in all guilt transgresses every bound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I had a brother once: the youthful peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Set out from Holland's isle, our natal ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To serve Heraclius, 'mid his knights arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who then the Grecian empire's sceptre swayed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Brother in arms and bosom-friend installed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here was he by a baron of that court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, in a pleasant site, and strongly walled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On Servia's distant frontier had a fort.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Argaeus he of whom I tell was called,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Husband of that ill hag, whom in such sort</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He loved, as passed all mean, and misbecame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One of his worth and honourable fame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>"But she, more volatile than leaf, when breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of autumn most its natural moisture dries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And strips the fluttering foliage from the trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, blown about, before its fury flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Changes her humour, and her husband sees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom she some time had loved, with other eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in her every wish and every thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Schemes how my brother's love may best be bought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"But not Acroceraunus fronts the brine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Ill-famed — against whose base the billow heaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor against Boreas stands the mountain pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That has a hundred times renewed its leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And towering high on Alp or Apennine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With its fast root the rock as deeply cleaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So firmly as the youth resists the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that foul woman, sink of every ill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Now, as it oft befalls a cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who seeks and finds adventure, high and low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It happened that my gentle brother near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His comrade's fort was wounded by a foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where often, uninvited by the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He guested, was his host with him or no;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thither he resorted from the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There to repose until his wounds were healed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"While there he wounded lay, upon some need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It chanced Argaeus was compelled to ride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quickly that wanton, from his presence freed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As was her use, my brother's fealty tried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he, as one unstained in thought and deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So fell a goad no longer would abide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to preserve his faith, as lures increased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of many evils chose what seemed the least.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"To break communion with the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him — of many — seemed the lightest ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And go so far, that wanton should not hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More of his name: this purpose to fulfil</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was honester (though quitting one so dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was hard) than to content her evil will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of her foul wishes to her lord impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who cherished her as fondly as his heart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>"And though yet smarting with his wounds and pined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He dons his arms, and from the tower departs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wanders thence with firm and constant mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ne'er to return again into those parts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But nought availed the purpose he designed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His projects Fortune baffled with new arts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while, behold! the castellain returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bathed in bitter tears the wife discerned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"And with flushed face, and hair in disarray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He asks of her what had disturbed her mood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, ere she in reply a word will say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is vainly more than once to answer wooed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the while is thinking in what way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight can best with vengeance be pursued.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well it suited with her fickle vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lightly to change her love into disdain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Ah! why should I conceal (in fine she cried)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fault committed while you were away?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For though I it from all the world should hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This would my conscience to myself bewray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The soul, which is with secret evil dyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Does with such penitence its fault appay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As every corporal sufferance exceeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou couldst deal me for my evil deeds;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `If evil be the deed, when done parforce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, be it what it may, the mischief know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, with my sword from this polluted corse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Delivered, let my spotless spirit go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And quench these wretched eyes, which in remorse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, if I lived, on earth must ever throw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the least penance of so foul a blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, look on whom they may, must blush for shame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>" `My honour has been ruined by thy mate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to this body violence has done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fearing lest I all to thee relate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without farewell the graceless churl is gone.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She by this story made her husband hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youth, than whom before was dearer none.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Argaeus credits all, without delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arms him, and, breathing vengeance, posts away.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"In knowledge of that country not to seek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He overtook the knight in little space;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For my poor brother, yet diseased and weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rode, unsuspicious, at an easy pace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Argaeus, eager his revenge to wreak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assailed him straight in a sequestered place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My brother would excuse him if he might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But his indignant host insists on fight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"This one was sound and full of new disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That weak and friendly, as aye wont to be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My brother was ill fitted to sustain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His altered comrade's new-born enmity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Philander, then unmeriting such pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So was the stripling named, described by me)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not gifted with the power to undergo</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such fierce assault, was taken by the foe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Forbid it, Heaven! I should be led astray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So by just wrath and thy iniquity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(To him Argaeus cried) as thee to slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who loved thee once, and certes thou lovedst me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though in the end thou ill didst this display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I yet desire this ample world may see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, measured by my deeds, I rank above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thyself in hate as highly as in love.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `In other mode shall I chastise the deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than spilling more of thine ill blood.' The peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This said, commands his followers, on a steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of verdant boughs composed to place a bier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the knight half-lifeless homeward speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in a tower enclose the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There dooms the guiltless stripling to remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And suffer prisonment's perpetual pain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Yet nothing but his former liberty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence to depart was wanting to the knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all the rest, as one at large and free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He ordered, and was still obeyed aright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that ill dame her former phantasy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursuing ever with unwearied sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having the keys, repaired nigh every day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the close turret where the prisoner lay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>"And evermore my brother she assailed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with more boldness prest her former suit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">`Mark what to thee fidelity availed!'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(She cries) `which all mere perfidy repute.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With what triumphant joy shalt thou be hailed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What noble spoils are thine, what happy fruit!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh what a worthy guerdon is thy meed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Branded by all men for a traitor's deed!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>" `How well thou mightst have given, and without stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of thine own honour, what I sought of thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now of so rigorous mood the worthy gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have and enjoy. In close captivity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou art; nor ever hope to break thy chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless thou soften thy obduracy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, if compliant, I a mean can frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To render thee thy liberty and fame.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `No, no; have thou no hope,' (replied the knight,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">`That my true faith shall ever change, although</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It thus should happen that, against all right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I should so hard a sentence undergo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let the world blame. Enough that in HIS sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Who sees and judges every thing below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in HIS grace divine my fame can clear —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My innocence unsullied shall appear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Does not Argaeus deem enough to sty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me in his prison, let him take away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This noisome life. Nor yet may Heaven deny</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its meed, though ill the world my work appay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet he who condemns me may, when I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Am parted from this tenement of clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perceive that he has wronged me in the end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shall bewail when dead his faithful friend.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Thus oftentimes that shameless woman prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The good Philander, but obtained no fruit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nursing her blind desires, which knew not rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In seeking what her wicked love may boot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She her old vices, in her inmost breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ransacks for what may best the occasion suit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sifts them all: then, having overrun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand evil thoughts, resolved on one.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Six months she waited ere again she sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prisoner's tower, as she was wont before:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From which the sad Philander hoped and thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That love to him the dame no longer bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! Fortune for her an occasion wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(To evil deed propitious evermore)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To give effect, with memorable ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her irrational and evil will.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"The husband had an ancient feud with one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was by name Morando hight the fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who even within the fort would often run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In its lord's absence; but the knight's repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the wide distance of ten miles would shun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was he assured the castellain was there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who now, to lure him thither, bruited how</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He for Jerusalem was bound by vow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Said he would go; and went. Thus each who spies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His outset, of his journey spreads the fame:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor he, who only on his wife relies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trusts any with his purpose but the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And home returned when dusky waxed the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever, save at evening, thither came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with changed ensigns, at the dawn of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unseen of any, always went his way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"He now on this side, now on the other side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roved round his castle but to ascertain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If credulous Morando, who to ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither was wonted, would return again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All day he in the forest used to hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, when he saw the sun beneath the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came to the tower, and, through a secret gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was there admitted by his faithless mate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Thus every one, except his consort ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Argaeus many miles away suppose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, when 'tis time her errand to fulfil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hatching new mischief, to my brother goes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of tears she has a ready shower at will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from her eyes into her bosom flows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">` — Where shall I succour find, now needed most,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that my honour be not wholly lost,</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>" `And, with my own, my wedded lord's?' (she cries;)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">`I should feel no alarm, if he were here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou knowst Morando, know if deities</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or men he in Argaeus' absence fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He at this time tries all extremities;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor servant have I but by threat or prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He him to further his desire has swayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor know I whither to recur for aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Of my lord's absence hearing the report,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that he would not quickly homeward fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had the insolence within my court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon no other pretext to repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, were my absent lord within his fort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So bold a deer not only would not dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But would not deem himself secure withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Heaven! at three miles' distance from his wall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `And what he erst by messenger had sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From me to-day has sued for face to face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in such manner that long time I thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dishonour must have followed and disgrace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if I had not humbly him besought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And feigned to yield to him with ready grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He haply would have ravished that by force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he expects to win by milder course.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `I promise, not designing to comply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For void is contract made in fear; alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From his ill purpose would I put him by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what he then parforce would else have done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So stands the case: the single remedy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lies in yourself: my honour else is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that of my Argaeus; which as dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or more so, than your own you vowed whilere.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>" `If you refuse me, I shall say, you show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That you have not the faith which you pretended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that in cruelty you said me no,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When vainly were my tears on you expended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And no wise for Argaeus' sake, although</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this pretext you have yourself defended.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our loves bad been concealed and free from blame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But here I stand exposed to certain shame.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>" `To me such preface needs not (said anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The good Philander), bound by amity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To my Argaeus still; thy pleasure shew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I what I ever was will be, and I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although from him I bear such ill undue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accuse him not; for him would I defy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even death itself; and let the world, allied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With my ill destiny, against me side!'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"The impious woman answered, ` 'Tis my will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou slay him who would do us foul despite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor apprehend to encounter any ill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I the certain mean will tell aright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will return, his purpose to fulfil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the third hour, when darkest is the night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, at a preconcerted signal made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be without noise by me within conveyed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Let it not irk thee to await the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within my chamber, where no light will be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till I shall make him doff his warlike gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, almost naked, yield him up to thee.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So did his wife into that quicksand steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her hapless husband (it appears to me)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If wife she rightly could be called; more fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cruel than a fury sprung from hell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"She drew my brother forth, that guilty night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his good arms in hand, and him again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Secreted in the chamber without light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till thither came the wretched castellain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As it was ordered, all fell out aright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For seldom ill design is schemed in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So fell Argaeus by Philander's sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for Morando took the castle's lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"One blow divided head and neck; for nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was there of helm, the warrior to defend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without a struggle was Argaeus brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his unhappy life's disastrous end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he who slew him never had such thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this would have believed: to aid his friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Intent, (strange chance!) he wrought him in that blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The worst that could be done by mortal foe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>"When now, unknown, on earth Argaeus lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My brother to Gabrina gave the blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So was she named) who lived but to betray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, who discovery had till then delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wills that Philander with a light survey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The man whom he on earth has lifeless laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she, with the assistance of the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shows him Argaeus in the murdered wight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>"And threatens, save he with desires comply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To which her bosom had been long a prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What he would be unable to deny</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She to the assembled household will display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he like traitor and assassin die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon her tale, in ignominious way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And minds him fame is not to be despised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit so little life by him be prized.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Philander stood oppressed with grief and fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When his mistake to him the woman showed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to have slain her in his wrath went near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And long be doubted, so his choler glowed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, but that Reason whispered in his ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he was in an enemy's abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For lack of faulchion in his empty sheath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would have torn her piece-meal with his teeth.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"As sometimes vessel by two winds which blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From different points is vext upon the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now one speeds the bark an-end, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another squall impels her back again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still on her poop assailed, or on her prow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till she before the strongest flies amain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Philander, so distraught by two designs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Takes what he pregnant with least ill opines.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Reason demonstrates with what peril fraught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His case, not more with death than lasting stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If in the castle were that murder taught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor any time has he to sift his brain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will he or nill he, in conclusion nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is left him but the bitter cup to drain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus in his troubled heart prevailing more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His fear his resolution overbore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>"The fear of shameful punishment's pursuit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made him with many protestations swear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To grant in every thing Gabrina's suit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If from the fortilage they safely fare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So plucks that impious dame, parforce, the fruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of her desires, and thence retreat the pair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus home again the young Philander came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving behind him a polluted name;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"And deeply graven in his bosom bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The image of his friend so rashly slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By this to purchase, to his torment sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A Progne, a Medea; impious gain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— And but his knightly faith, and oaths he swore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were to his fury as a curbing rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From him when safe she would have met her fate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But lived subjected to his bitterest hate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Thenceforth he nevermore was seen to smile:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All his discourse was sad, and still ensued</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobs from his breast; afflicted in the style</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of vext Orestes, when he in his mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had slain his mother and Aegysthus vile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By vengeful furies for the deed pursued.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till broken by the ceaseless grief he fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sickened and betook himself to bed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Now in the harlot, when she had discerned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This other set by her so little store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The former amorous flame was quickly turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into despiteous rage and hatred sore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor with less wrath she towards my brother burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than for Argaeus she had felt before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she disposed herself, in treasons versed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To slay her second husband like the first.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Of a deceitful leech she made assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well fitted for the work she had in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who better knew what deadly poisons slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than he the force of healing syrup scanned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And promised him his service to repay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a reward exceeding his demand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he should, with some drink of deadly might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of her detested husband rid her sight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>"In presence of myself and more beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wicked elder, with his deadly dole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approaching my unhappy brother, cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">`It was a sovereign drink to make him whole.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But here a new device Gabrina tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, ere the sickly man could taste the bowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rid her of accomplice in the deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or to defraud him of his promised meed;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Seized on his hand, the instant he presented</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The poison to my brother. `Ill my fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Exclaimed the dame) by you would be resented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Excited for a spouse I hold so dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, that the beverage has not been fermented</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With evil drug and poisonous, will be clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor deem it meet that you to him convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The proffered bowl, unless you take the say.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"In what condition think you, sir, remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wretched elder by his fears opprest?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus by the woman's suddenness constrained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had no time for thinking what were best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, lest more doubt of him be entertained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tastes of the chalice, at Gabrina's hest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the sick man, emboldened so, drinks up</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All the remainder of the poisoned cup.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"As the trained hawk of crooked talon who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clutches the partridge, when about to eat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is by the dog, she deems her comrade true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O'ertaken and defrauded of the meat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So on ill gain intent, the leech, in lieu</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the expected aid, received defeat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hear, thus, what sovereign wickedness will dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be like fate each greedy miscreant's share!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"This past and done, the leech would homeward speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he, to counteract the pest he bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within his bowels, in this fearful need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might use some secret of his cunning lore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But this the wicked dame would not concede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forbidding him to issue thence before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His patient's stomach should the juice digest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And its restoring power be manifest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"No prayer will move, nor offered price will buy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The woman's leave to let him thence depart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The desperate man who saw that death was nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sure to follow, quickly changed his part;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And told the story to the standers-by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor could she cover it with all her art.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus what he wont to do by many a one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That goodly doctor by himself has done;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"And follows with his soul my brother true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hence, already freed, was gone before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We, the assistants, that the matter knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the old man who lingered little more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Took that abominable monster, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More cruel was than beast in forest hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, prisoned in a darksome place, reserved</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To perish in the fire, as she deserved."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>So said Hermonides, and had pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His tale, and told how she from prison fled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But suffered from his wound a pang so shrewd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fell reversed upon his grassy bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile two squires, who served him in the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A rustic bier of sturdy branches spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their master upon this the servants lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who could not thence be borne in other way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Zerbino, in excuse, assured the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He grieved so good a knight to have offended;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, as was still the use of cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had guarded her who in his guidance wended;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor had he else preserved his honour clear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For when the dame was to his care commended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her to defend his promise he had plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From all men, to the utmost of his might.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>He, if he might, is any thing beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would readily assist him in his need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— His only wish, (the cavalier replied,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was, he might be from ill Gabrina freed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere him some mighty mischief should betide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of future penitence the bitter seed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gabrina keeps on earth her downcast eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ill the simple truth admits reply.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Zerbino thence, upon the promised way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the old woman in his escort, went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And inly cursed her all the livelong day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in her cause that baron he had shent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having heard the knight her guilt display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was instructed in her evil bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He — if before he had her at despite —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So loathed her, she was poison to his sight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Well read in young Zerbino's hate, the dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would not by him in malice be outdone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor bated him an inch, but in that game</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of deadly hatred set him two for one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her face was with the venom in a flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith her swelling bosom overrun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twas thus in such concord as I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These through the ancient wood pursued their way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>When, lo! as it is now nigh eventide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They a mixt sound of blows and outcries hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which seem a sign of battle fiercely plied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (as the deafening noise demonstrates) near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To mark what this might be, towards that side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence came the tumult, moved the Scottish peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor is in following him Gabrina slow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What chanced in other canto you shall know.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
