<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>CANTO 1</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Angelica, whom pressing danger frights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flies in disorder through the greenwood shade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rinaldo's horse escapes: he, following, fights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ferrau, the Spaniard, in a forest glade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A second oath the haughty paynim plights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keeps it better than the first he made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">King Sacripant regains his long-lost treasure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But good Rinaldo mars his promised pleasure.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>OF LOVES and LADIES, KNIGHTS and ARMS, I sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of COURTESIES, and many a DARING FEAT;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from those ancient days my story bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Moors from Afric passed in hostile fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ravaged France, with Agramant their king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flushed with his youthful rage and furious heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who on king Charles', the Roman emperor's head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had vowed due vengeance for Troyano dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>In the same strain of Roland will I tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Things unattempted yet in prose or rhyme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On whom strange madness and rank fury fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A man esteemed so wise in former time;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she, who to like cruel pass has well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nigh brought my feeble wit which fain would climb</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hourly wastes my sense, concede me skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And strength my daring promise to fulfil.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Good seed of Hercules, give ear and deign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou that this age's grace and splendour art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hippolitus, to smile upon his pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who tenders what he has with humble heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For though all hope to quit the score were vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My pen and pages may pay the debt in part;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, with no jealous eye my offering scan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor scorn my gifts who give thee all I can.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>And me, amid the worthiest shalt thou hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom I with fitting praise prepare to grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Record the good Rogero, valiant peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ancient root of thine illustrious race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of him, if thou wilt lend a willing ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The worth and warlike feats I shall retrace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So thou thy graver cares some little time</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Postponing, lend thy leisure to my rhyme.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>Roland, who long the lady of Catay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica, had loved, and with his brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raised countless trophies to that damsel gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In India, Median, and Tartarian land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Westward with her had measured back his way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, nigh the Pyrenees, with many a band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Germany and France, King Charlemagne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had camped his faithful host upon the plain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>To make King Agramant, for penance, smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His cheek, and rash Marsilius rue the hour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This, when all trained with lance and sword to fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He led from Africa to swell his power;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That other when he pushed, in fell despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the realm of France Spain's martial flower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twas thus Orlando came where Charles was tented</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In evil hour, and soon the deed repented.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>For here was seized his dame of peerless charms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(How often human judgment wanders wide)!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom in long warfare he had kept from harms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From western climes to eastern shores her guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his own land, 'mid friends and kindred arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now without contest severed from his side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fearing the mischief kindled by her eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From him the prudent emperor reft the prize.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>For bold Orlando and his cousin, free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, late contended for the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enamored of that beauty rare; since she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alike the glowing breast of either swayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Charles, who little liked such rivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And drew an omen thence of feebler aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To abate the cause of quarrel, seized the fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And placed her in Bavarian Namus' care.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>Vowing with her the warrior to content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in that conflict, on that fatal day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his good hand most gainful succour lent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And slew most paynims in the martial fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But counter to his hopes the battle went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his thinned squadrons fled in disarray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Namus, with other Christian captains taken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his pavilion in the rout forsaken.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>There, lodged by Charles, that gentle bonnibel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ordained to be the valiant victor's meed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the event had sprung into her sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the combat turned in time of need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Presaging wisely Fortune would rebel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That fatal day against the Christian creed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, entering a thick wood, discovered near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a close path, a horseless cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>With shield upon his arm, in knightly wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Belted and mailed, his helmet on his head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight more lightly through the forest hies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than half-clothed churl to win the cloth of red.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not from cruel snake more swiftly flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The timid shepherdess, with startled tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than poor Angelica the bridle turns</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When she the approaching knight on foot discerns.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>This was that Paladin, good Aymon's seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who Mount Albano had in his command;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And late Baiardo lost, his gallant steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Escaped by strange adventure from his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as seen, the maid who rode at speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior knew, and, while yet distant, scanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The angelic features and the gentle air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which long had held him fast in Cupid's snare.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The affrighted damsel turns her palfrey round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shakes the floating bridle in the wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor in her panic seeks to choose her ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor open grove prefers to thicket blind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But reckless, pale and trembling, and astound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaves to her horse the devious way to find.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He up and down the forest bore the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till to a sylvan river's bank he came.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Here stood the fierce Ferrau in grisly plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Begrimed with dust, and bathed with sweat and blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who lately had withdrawn him from the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rest and drink at that refreshing flood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But there had tarried in his own despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since bending from the bank, in hasty mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He dropped his helmet in the crystal tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vainly to regain the treasure tried.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>Thither at speed she drives, and evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In her wild panic utters fearful cries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at the voice, upleaping on the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Saracen her lovely visage spies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, pale as is her cheek, and troubled sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arriving, quickly to the warrior's eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Though many days no news of her had shown)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beautiful Angelica is known.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Courteous, and haply gifted with a breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As warm as either of the cousins two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As bold, as if his brows in steel were dressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The succour which she sought he lent, and drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His faulchion, and against Rinaldo pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who saw with little fear the champion true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only each to each was known by sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But each had proved in arms his foeman's might.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Thus, as they are, on foot the warriors vie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In cruel strife, and blade to blade oppose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No marvel plate or brittle mail should fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When anvils had not stood the deafening blows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It now behoves the palfrey swift to ply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His feet; for while the knights in combat close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him vexed to utmost speed, with goading spurs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By waste or wood the frighted damsel stirs.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>After the two had struggled long to throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each other in the strife, and vainly still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since neither valiant warrior was below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His opposite in force and knightly skill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first to parley with his Spanish foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was the good master of Albano's hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As one within whose raging breast was pent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A reckless fire which struggled for a vent).</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Thou think'st," he said, "to injure me alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But know thou wilt thyself as much molest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if we fight because yon rising sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This raging heat has kindled in thy breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What were thy gain, and what the guerdon won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though I should yield my life, or stoop my crest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she shall never be thy glorious meed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who flies, while vainly we in battle bleed?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Then how much better, since our stake's the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou, loving like myself, should'st mount and stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wait this battle's end, the lovely dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before she fly yet further on her way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady taken, we repeat our claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With naked faulchion to that peerless prey:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Else by long toil I see not what we gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But simple loss and unrequited pain."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The peer's proposal pleased the paynim well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so their hot contention was foregone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such fair truce replaced that discord fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So mutual wrongs forgot and mischief done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That for departure seated in his sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On foot the Spaniard left not Aymon's son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But him to mount his courser's crupper prayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And both united chased the royal maid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Oh! goodly truth in cavaliers of old!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rivals they were, to different faith were bred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not yet the weary warriors' wounds were cold —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still smarting from those strokes so fell and dread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet they together ride by waste and wold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, unsuspecting, devious dingle thread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Them, while four spurs infest his foaming sides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their courser brings to where the way divides.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And now the warlike pair at fault, for they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knew not by which she might her palfrey goad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Since both, without distinction, there survey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The recent print of hoofs on either road),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Commit the chase to fortune. By this way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim pricked, by that Rinaldo strode.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But fierce Ferrau, bewildered in the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Found himself once again where late he stood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Beside the water, where he stoop'd to drink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dropt the knightly helmet, — to his cost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sunk in the stream; and since he could not think</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her to retrieve, who late his hopes had crossed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, where the treasure fell, descends the brink</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that swift stream, and seeks the morion lost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the casque lies so bedded in the sands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twill ask no light endeavour at his hands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>A bough he severs from a neighbouring tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shreds and shapes the branch into a pole:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this he sounds the stream, and anxiously</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fathoms, and rakes, and ransacks shelf and hole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While angered sore at heart, and restless, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So lingered, where the troubled waters roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Breast-high, from the mid river rose upright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The apparition of an angry knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Armed at all points he was, except his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in his better hand a helmet bore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The very casque, which in the river's bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ferrau sought vainly, toiling long and sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the Spanish knight he frowned, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Thou traitor to thy word, thou perjured Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why grieve the goodly helmet to resign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, due to me long since, is justly mine?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Remember, pagan, when thine arm laid low</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The brother of Angelica. That knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Am I; — thy word was plighted then to throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After my other arms his helmet bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If Fortune now compel thee to forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prize, and do my will in thy despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grieve not at this, but rather grieve that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Art found a perjured traitor to thy vow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"But if thou seek'st a helmet, be thy task</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To win and wear it more to thy renown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A noble prize were good Orlando's casque;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo's such, or yet a fairer crown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Almontes', or Mambrino's iron masque:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make one of these, by force of arms, thine own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this good helm will fitly be bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where (such thy promise) it has long been owed."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Bristled the paynim's every hair at view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that grim shade, uprising from the tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vanished was his fresh and healthful hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While on his lips the half-formed accents died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next hearing Argalia, whom he slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So was the warrior hight) that stream beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus his unknightly breach of promise blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He burned all over, flushed with rage and shame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor having time his falsehood to excuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knowing well how true the phantom's lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood speechless; such remorse the words infuse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then by Lanfusa's life the warrior swore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never in fight, or foray would he use</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Helmet but that which good Orlando bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Aspramont, where bold Almontes paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His life a forfeit to the Christian blade.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>And this new vow discharged more faithfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than the vain promise which was whilom plight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the stream departing heavily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was many days sore vexed and grieved in sprite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still intent to seek Orlando, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roved wheresoe'er he hoped to find the knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A different lot befel Rinaldo; who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had chanced another pathway to pursue.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>For far the warrior fared not, ere he spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bounding across the path, his gallant steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, "Stay, Bayardo mine," Rinaldo cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Too cruel care the loss of thee does breed."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The horse for this returned not to his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deaf to his prayer, but flew with better speed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Furious, in chase of him, Rinaldo hies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But follow we Angelica, who flies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Through dreary woods and dark the damsel fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By rude unharboured heath and savage height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While every leaf or spray that rustled, bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Of oak, or elm, or beech), such new affright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She here and there her foaming palfrey sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By strange and crooked paths with furious flight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at each shadow, seen in valley blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or mountain, feared Rinaldo was behind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>As a young roe or fawn of fallow deer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, mid the shelter of its native glade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has seen a hungry pard or tiger tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bosom of its bleeding dam, dismayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bounds, through the forest green in ceaseless fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the destroying beast, from shade to shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at each sapling touched, amid its pangs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believes itself between the monster's fangs,</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>One day and night, and half the following day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel wanders wide, nor whither knows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then enters a deep wood, whose branches play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moved lightly by the freshening breeze which blows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through this two clear and murmuring rivers stray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon their banks a fresher herbage grows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the twin streams their passage slowly clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make music with the stones, and please the ear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Weening removed the way by which she wends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand miles from loathed Rinaldo's beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rest herself a while the maid intends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wearied with that long flight and summer's heat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She from her saddle 'mid spring flowers descends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And takes the bridle from her courser fleet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And loose along the river lets him pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roving the banks in search of lusty grass.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Behold! at hand a thicket she surveys</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gay with the flowering thorn and vermeil rose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tuft reflected in the stream which strays</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside it, overshadowing oaks enclose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hollow within, and safe from vulgar gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seemed a place constructed for repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With bows so interwoven, that the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pierced not the tangled screen, far less the sight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Within soft moss and herbage form a bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to delay and rest the traveller woo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twas there her limbs the weary damsel spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her eye-balls bathed in slumber's balmy dew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But little time had eased her drooping head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere, as she weened, a courser's tramp she knew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Softly she rises, and the river near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed cap-a-pie, beholds a cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>If friend or foe, she nothing comprehends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So hope and fear her doubting bosom tear)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that adventure's issue mute attends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor even with a sigh disturbs the air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavalier upon the bank descends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sits so motionless, so lost in care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(His visage propt upon his arm) to sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Changed into senseless stone appeared the knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>Pensive, above an hour, with drooping head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He rested mute, ere he began his moan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then his piteous tale of sorrow said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lamenting in so soft and sweet a tone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He in a tiger's breast had pity bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or with his mournful wailings rent a stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so he sighed and wept; like rivers flowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His tears, his bosom like an Aetna glowed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Thought which now makes me burn, now freeze with hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which gnaws my heart and rankles at its root!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What's left to me," he said, "arrived too late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While one more favoured bears away the fruit?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bare words and looks scarce cheered my hopeless state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the prime spoils reward another's suit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then since for me nor fruit nor blossom hangs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why should I longer pine in hopeless pangs?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>"The virgin has her image in the rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sheltered in garden on its native stock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which there in solitude and safe repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blooms unapproached by sheperd or by flock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this earth teems, and freshening water flows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And breeze and dewy dawn their sweets unlock:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such the wistful youth his bosom dresses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such the enamored damsel braids her tresses.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"But wanton hands no sooner this displace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the maternal stem, where it was grown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than all is withered; whatsoever grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It found with man or heaven; bloom, beauty, gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel who should hold in higher place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than light or life the flower which is her own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suffering the spoiler's hand to crop the prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forfeits her worth in every other's eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"And be she cheap with all except the wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On whom she did so large a boon bestow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah! false and cruel Fortune! foul despite!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While others triumph, I am drown'd in woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And can it be that I such treasure slight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And can I then my very life forego?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No! let me die; 'twere happiness above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A longer life, if I must cease to love."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>If any ask who made this sorrowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pour'd into the stream so many tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I answer, it was fair Circassia's king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Sacripant, oppressed with amorous cares.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love is the source from which his troubles spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sole occasion of his pains and fears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he to her a lover's service paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now well remembered by the royal maid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>He for her sake from Orient's farthest reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roved thither, where the sun descends to rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he was told in India, to his pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she Orlando followed to the west.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He after learned in France that Charlemagne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Secluded from that champion and the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As a fit guerdon, mewed her for the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who should protect the lilies best in fight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The warrior in the field had been, and viewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Short time before, king Charlemagne's disgrace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vainly had Angelica pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor of the damsel's footsteps found a trace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this is what the weeping monarch rued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this he so bewailed in doleful case:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence, into words his lamentations run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which might for pity stop the passing sun.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>While Sacripant laments him in this plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And makes a tepid fountain of his eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, what I deem not needful to recite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pours forth yet other plaints and piteous cries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Propitious Fortune will his lady bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should hear the youth lament him in such wise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus a moment compassed what, without</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such chance, long ages had not brought about.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>With deep attention, while the warrior weeps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She marks the fashion of the grief and tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And words of him, whose passion never sleeps;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this the first confession which she hears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with his plaint her heart no measure keeps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cold as the column which the builder rears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like haughty maid, who holds herself above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The world, and deems none worthy of her love.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>But her from harm amid those woods to keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel weened she might his guidance need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the poor drowning caitiff, who, chin-deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Implores not help, is obstinate indeed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor will she, if she let the occasion sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Find escort that will stand her in such stead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For she that king by long experience knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above all other lovers, kind and true.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>But not the more for this the maid intends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To heal the mischief which her charms had wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for past ills to furnish glad amends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that full bliss by pining lover sought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To keep the king in play are all her ends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His help by some device or fiction bought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having to her purpose taxed his daring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To reassume as wont her haughty bearing.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>An apparition bright and unforeseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She stood like Venus or Diana fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In solemn pageant, issuing on the scene</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From out of shadowy wood or murky lair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And "Peace be with you," cried the youthful queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"And God preserve my honour in his care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor suffer that you blindly entertain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Opinion of my fame so false and vain!"</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Not with such wonderment a mother eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such excessive bliss the son she mourned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As dead, lamented still with tears and sighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since the thinned files without her boy returned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Not such her rapture as the king's surprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ecstasy of joy when he discerned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lofty presence, cheeks of heavenly hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lovely form which broke upon his view.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>He, full of fond and eager passion, pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards his Lady, his Divinity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she now clasped the warrior to her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in Catay had haply been less free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now again the maid her thoughts addressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards her native land and empery:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And feels, with hope revived, her bosom beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shortly to repossess her sumptuous seat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>Her chances all to him the damsel said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since he was eastward sent to Sericane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By her to seek the martial monarch's aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who swayed the sceptre of that fair domain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And told how oft Orlando's friendly blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had saved her from dishonour, death, and pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how she so preserved her virgin flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pure as it blossomed in her natal hour.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Haply the tale was true; yet will not seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Likely to one of sober sense possessed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Sacripant, who waked from worser dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all without a cavil acquiesced:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since love, who sees without one guiding gleam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spies in broad day but that which likes him best:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For one sign of the afflicted man's disease</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is to give ready faith to things which please.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"If good Anglante's lord the prize forbore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor seized the fair occasion when he might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The loss be his, if Fortune never more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him to enjoy so fair a prize invite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To imitate that lord of little lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I think not," said, apart, Circassa's knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"To quit such proffered good, and, to my shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have but myself on after-thought to blame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"No! I will pluck the fresh and morning rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, should I tarry, may be overblown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To woman, (this my own experience shows),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No deed more sweet or welcome can be done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, whatsoever scorn the damsel shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though she awhile may weep and make her moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will, unchecked by anger, false or true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or sharp repulse, my bold design pursue."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>This said, he for the soft assault prepares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When a loud noise within the greenwood shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside him, rang in his astounded ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sore against his will the monarch stayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He donned his helm (his other arms he wears),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye wont to rove in steel, with belted blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Replaced the bridle on his courser fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grappled his lance, and sprang into his seat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>With the bold semblance of a valiant knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold a warrior threads the forest hoar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stranger's mantle was of snowy white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And white alike the waving plume he wore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Balked of his bliss, and full of fell despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch ill the interruption bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And spurred his horse to meet him in mid space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hate and fury glowing in his face.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Him he defies to fight, approaching nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And weens to make him stoop his haughty crest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other knight, whose worth I rate as high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His warlike prowess puts to present test;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cuts short his haughty threats and angry cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And spurs, and lays his levelled lance in rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In tempest wheels Circassia's valiant peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at his foeman's head each aims his spear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Not brindled bulls or tawny lions spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To forest warfare with such deadly will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As those two knights, the stranger and the king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their spears alike the opposing bucklers thrill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The solid ground, at their encountering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trembles from fruitful vale to naked hill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well it was the mail in which they dressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their bodies was of proof, and saved the breast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor swerved the chargers from their destined course;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who met like rams, and butted head to head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warlike Saracen's ill-fated horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well valued while alive, dropt short and dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stranger's, too, fell senseless; but perforce</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was roused by rowel from his grassy bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That of the paynim king, extended straight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lay on his battered lord with all his weight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Upright upon his steed, the knight unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who at the encounter horse and rider threw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming enough was in the conflict done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cares not the worthless warfare to renew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But endlong by the readiest path is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And measures, pricking frith and forest through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mile, or little less, in furious heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere the foiled Saracen regains his feet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>As the bewildered and astonished clown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who held the plough (the thunder storm o'erpast)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There, where the deafening bolt had beat him down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nigh his death-stricken cattle, wakes aghast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sees the distant pine without its crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he saw clad in leafy honours last;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So rose the paynim knight with troubled face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The maid spectatress of the cruel case.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>He sighs and groans, yet not for mischief sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Endured in wounded arm or foot which bled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for mere shame, and never such before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or after, dyed his cheek so deep a red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if he rued his fall, it grieved him more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His dame should lift him from his courser dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He speechless had remained, I ween, if she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had not his prisoned tongue and voice set free.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Grieve not," she said, "sir monarch, for thy fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But let the blame upon thy courser be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom more welcome had been forage, stall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rest, than further joust and jeopardy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well thy foe the loser may I call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Who shall no glory gain) for such is he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who is the first to quit his ground, if aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica of fighting fields be taught."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>While she so seeks the Saracen to cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold a messenger with pouch and horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On panting hackney! — man and horse appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the long journey, weary and forlorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He questions Sacripant, approaching near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had he seen warrior pass, by whom were borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A shield and crest of white; in search of whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the wide forest pricked the weary groom.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>King Sacripant made answer, "As you see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He threw me here, and went but now his way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then tell the warrior's name, that I may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Informed whose valour foiled me in the fray."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him the groom, — "That which you ask of me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I shall relate to you without delay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Know that you were in combat prostrate laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the tried valour of a gentle maid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Bold is the maid; but fairer yet than bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor the redoubted virgin's name I veil:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twas Bradamant who marred what praise of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your prowess ever won with sword and mail."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This said, he spurred again, his story told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And left him little gladdened by the tale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He recks not what he says or does, for shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his flushed visage kindles into flame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>After the woeful warrior long had thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his cruel case, and still in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And found a woman his defeat had wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thinking but increased the monarch's pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He climbed the other horse, nor spake he aught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But silently uplifted from the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the croup bestowed that damsel sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reserved to gladder use in safer seat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Two miles they had not rode before they hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sweeping woods which spread about them, sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such loud crash and trample, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The forest seemed to tremble all around;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shortly after see a steed appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With housings wrought in gold and richly bound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who clears the bush and stream, with furious force</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whatsoever else impedes his course.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Unless the misty air," the damsel cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"And boughs deceive my sight, yon noble steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is, sure, Bayardo, who before us flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And parts the wood with such impetuous speed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Yes, 'tis Bayardo's self I recognize.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How well the courser understands our need!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two riders ill a foundered jade would bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But hither speeds the horse to end that care."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The bold Circassian lighted, and applied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His hand to seize him by the flowing rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, swiftly turning, with his heels replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he like lightning wheeled upon the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Woe to the king! but that he leaps aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For should he smite, he would not lash in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such are his bone and sinew, that the shock</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his good heels had split a metal rock.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Then to the maid he goes submissively,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With gentle blandishment and humble mood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the dog greets his lord with frolic glee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom, some short season past, he had not viewed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For good Bayardo had in memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albracca, where her hands prepared his food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time the damsel loved Rinaldo bold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, then ungrateful, stern, and cold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>With her left hand she takes him by the bit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the other pats his sides and chest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the good steed (so marvellous his wit),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lamb-like, obeyed the damsel and caressed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meantime the king, who sees the moment fit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leapt up, and with his knees the courser pressed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While on the palfrey, eased of half his weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady left the croup, and gained the seat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Then, as at hazard, she directs her sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sounding in arms a man on foot espies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And glows with sudden anger and despite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For she in him the son of Aymon eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her more than life esteems the youthful knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While she from him, like crane from falcon, flies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Time was the lady sighed, her passion slighted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Tis now Rinaldo loves, as ill requited.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And this effect two different fountains wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose wonderous waters different moods inspire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both spring in Arden, with rare virtue fraught:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This fills the heart with amorous desire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who taste that other fountain are untaught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their love, and change for ice their former fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo drank the first, and vainly sighs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica the last, and hates and flies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Mixed with such secret bane the waters glide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which amorous care convert to sudden hate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The maid no sooner had Rinaldo spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than on her laughing eyes deep darkness sate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with sad mien and trembling voice she cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Sacripant, and prayed him not to wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The near approach of the detested knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But through the wood with her pursue his flight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>To her the Saracen, with anger hot:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Is knightly worship sunk so low in me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou should'st hold my valour cheap, and not</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sufficient to make yonder champion flee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already are Albracca's fights forgot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that dread night I singly stood for thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That night when I, though naked, was thy shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against King Agrican and all his field?"</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>She answers not, and knows not in her fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What 'tis she does; Rinaldo is too nigh:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from afar that furious cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threats the bold Saracen with angry cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as the known steed and damsel dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose charms such flame had kindled, meet his eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But what ensued between the haughty pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I in another canto shall declare.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
