<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-37" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>CANTO 37</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Lament and outcry loud of some that mourn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attract Rogero and the damsels two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They find Ulania, with her mantle shorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Marganor, amid her moaning crew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon that felon knight, for his foul scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fierce revenge Marphisa takes: a new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Statute that maid does in the town obtain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Marganor is by Ulania slain.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>If, as in seeking other gift to gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For Nature, without study, yieldeth nought)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With mighty diligence, and mickle pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Illustrious women day and night have wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if with good success the female train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a fair end no homely task have brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So — did they for such other studies wake —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As mortal attributes immortal make;</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>And, if they of themselves sufficient were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their praises to posterity to show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor borrowed authors' aid, whose bosoms are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With envy and with hate corroded so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That oft they hide the good they might declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tell in every place what ill they know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To such a pitch would mount the female name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As haply ne'er was reached by manly fame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>To furnish mutual aid is not enow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For many who would lend each other light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Men do their best, that womankind should show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whatever faults they have in open sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would hinder them of rising from below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sink them to the bottom, if they might;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say the ancients; as if glory, won</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By woman, dimmed their own, as mist the sun.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>But hands or tongue ne'er had, nor has, the skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Does voice or lettered page the thought impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though each, with all its power, increase the ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Diminishing the good with all its art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So female fame to stifle, but that still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The honour of the sex survives in part:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet reacheth not its pitch, nor such its flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that 'tis far below its natural height.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>Not only Thomyris and Harpalice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who brought Hector, who brought Turnus aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who, to build in Lybia crost the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Tyrian and Sidonian band obeyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only famed Zenobia, only she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who Persian, Indian, and Assyrian frayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only these and some few others merit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their glory, that eternal fame inherit:</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>Faithful, chaste, and bold, the world hath seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Greece and Rome not only, but where'er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Sun unfolds his flowing locks, between</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Hesperides and Indian hemisphere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose gifts and praise have so extinguished been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We scarce of one amid a thousand hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this because they in their days have had</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For chroniclers, men envious, false, and bad.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>But ye that prosper in the exercise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of goodly labours, aye your way pursue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor halt, O women, in your high emprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For fear of not receiving honour due:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, as nought good endures beneath the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So ill endures no more; if hitherto</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unfriendly by the poet's pen and page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They now befriend you in our better age.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Erewhile Marullo and Pontante for you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Declared, and — sire and son — the Strozzi twain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Capello, Bembo, and that writer, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has fashioned like himself the courtier train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Lewis Alamanni, and those two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beloved of Mars and Muses, of their strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descended, who the mighty city rule,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Mincius parts, and moats with marshy pool.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>One of this pair (besides that, of his will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He honours you, and does you courtesies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And makes Parnassus and high Cynthus' hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resound your praise, and lift it to the skies)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The love, the faith, and mind, unconquered still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid threats of ruin, which in stedfast wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him his constant Isabel hath shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Render yet more your champion than his own.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>So that he never more will wearied be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With quickening in his verse your high renown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if another censures you, than he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prompter to arm in your defence is none;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor knight, in this wide world, more willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Life in the cause of virtue would lay down:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Matter as well for other's pen he gives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As in his own another's glory lives;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>And well he merits, that a dame so blest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Blest with all worth, which in this earthly round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is seen in them who don the female vest,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him hath evermore been faithful found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a sure pillar of pure truth possest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In her, despising Fortune's every wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthy of one another are the twain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor better ere were paired in wedlock's chain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>New trophies he on Oglio's bank has shown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he, mid bark and car, amid the gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fire and sword, such goodly rhymes hath strown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As may with envy swell the neighbouring stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Hercules Bentivoglio next is blown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The noble strain, your honour's noble theme;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reynet Trivulzio and Guidetti mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Molza, called of Phoebus and the Nine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>There's Hercules of the Carnuti, son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of my own duke, who spreads his every plume</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Soaring and singing, like harmonious swan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And even to heaven uplifts your name; with whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is my lord of Guasto, not alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A theme for many an Athens, many a Rome;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his high strain he promises as well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your praise to all posterity to tell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And beside these and others of our day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who gave you once, or give you now renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This for yourselves ye may yourselves purvey:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For many, laying silk and sampler down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the melodious Muses, to allay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their thirst at Aganippe's well, have gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still are going; who so fairly speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That we more theirs than they our labour need.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>If I of these would separately tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And render good account and honour due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than one page I with their praise should swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ought beside would this day's canto shew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if on five or six alone I dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I may offend and anger all the crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What then shall I resolve? to pass all by?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or choose but one from such a company?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>One will I choose, and such will choose, that she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All envy shall so well have overthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No other woman can offend be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If, passing others, her I praise alone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor joys this one but immortality,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through her sweet style (and better know I none):</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But who is honoured in her speech and page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall burst the tomb, and live through every age.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>As Phoebus to his silvery sister shows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His visage more, and lends her brighter fires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Venus, Maja, or to star that glows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone, or circles with the heavenly quires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So he with sweeter eloquence than flows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From other lips, that gentle dame inspires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gives her word such force, a second sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seems in our days its glorious course to run.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Mid victories born, Victoria is her name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well named; and whom (does she advance or stay)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Triumphs and trophies evermore proclaim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While Victory heads or follows her array.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another Artemisia is the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Renowned for love of her Mausolus, yea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By so much greater, as it is more brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To raise the dead, than lay them in the grave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>If chaste Laodamia, Portia true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Evadne, Argia, Arria, and many more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Merited praise, because that glorious crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Coveted burial with their lords of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How much more fame is to Victoria due?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That from dull Lethe, and the river's shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which nine times hems the ghosts, to upper light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has dragged her lord, in death and fate's despite.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>If that loud-voiced Maeonian trump whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Macedonian grudged Achilles, how,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Francis Pescara, O unconquered peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would he begrudge thee, were he living now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That wife, so virtuous and to thee so dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy well-earned glory through the world should blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that thy name through her should so rebound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou needst not crave a clearer trumpet's sound!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>If all that is to tell, and all I fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would of that lady tell, I wished to unfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though long, yet not so long, would be the stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that large portion would be left untold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While at a stand the story would remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fierce Marphisa and her comrades bold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To follow whom I promised erst, if you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would but return to hear my song anew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Now, being here to listen to my say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I would not break my promise, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until my better leisure, will delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her every praise at length to certify.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that I think she needs my humble lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with such treasure can herself supply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But simply to appay my single end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That gentle dame to honour and commend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Ladies, in fine I say, that every age</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthy of story, many a dame supplies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that, through jealous authors' envious rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unchronicled by fame, each matron dies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But will no more; since in the historic page</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your virtues ye, yourselves, immortalize.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had those two damsels in this art been read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their every warlike deed had wider spread.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Bradamant and Marphisa would I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose bold, victorious deeds, in battle done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I strive to bring into the light of day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But nine in ten remain to me unknown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I what I know right willingly display;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well, that all fair actions should be shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well that, gentle ladies, I am bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye whom I love and honour, to content.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>As said, in act to go Rogero stood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, having taken leave, the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Withdraws his trenchant faulchion from the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which holds no more the weapon, as whilere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, sounding loud amid that solitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cry, not distant far, arrests the peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then thitherward he with those damsels made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prompt, if 'twere needed, to bestow his aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>They rode an-end; and louder waxed the sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And plainer were the plaintive words they heard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When in a valley they three women found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Making that plaint, who in strange garb appeared:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For to the navel were those three ungowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Their coats by some uncourteous varlet sheared —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knowing not how better to disguise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their shame, they sate on earth, and dared not rise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>As Vulcan's son, that sprang (as it is versed)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of the dust, without a mother made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom — so Minerva bade — Aglauros nursed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sovereign care, too bold and curious maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seated in car, by him constructed first</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hide his hideous feet, was erst conveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that which never is to sight revealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sitting, those mournful damsels kept concealed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>At that dishonest sight and shameful, glows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each martial damsel's visage, overspread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the rich dyes of Paestum's crimson rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When vernal airs their gentle influence shed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant marked them; and that one of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was Ulany, the damsel quickly read;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ulany, that was sent with solemn train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the LOST ISLE to royal Charlemagne;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And recognised the other two no less;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From them she saw, when she saw Ulany;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now to her directed her address.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the most honoured of those ladies three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Demanding, who so full of wickedness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So lawless was and so unmannerly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he those secrets to the sight revealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Nature, as she could, 'twould seem, concealed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Ulany, that in Bradamant descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Known both by voice and ensignry — the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who some few days before those knights of pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her victorious lance on earth had laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How, in a town not far remote — replied —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An evil race, by pity never swayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besides that they their raiment thus had shorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had beat them, and had done them other scorn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>What of the shield became, she cannot say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor knows she those three monarchs' destiny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who guided her so long upon her way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If killed, or led into captivity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And says that she herself has ta'en her way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit to fare a-foot sore irksome be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To appeal to royal Charlemagne, assured</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him such outrage will not be endured.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>To hear, yet more to see, so foul a wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disturbed the Child and damsels' placid air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And beauteous visage, whose bold hearts and strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less compassionate than valiant were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They now, all else forgetting, ere the tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Ulany prefers demand, or prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they would venge them on their cruel foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In haste towards the felon's castle go.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>With one constant, the maids and cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By their great goodness moved, from plate and mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had stript their upper vests, well fitting gear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those miserable ladies' shame to veil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant suffers not, that, as whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sad Ulany shall tramp by hill and dale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But seats her on her horse's croup; so do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her comrades by those other damsels two.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>To gentle Bradamant Ulania showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The nearest way to reach the castle height;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While comfort Bradamant on her bestowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Promising vengeance for that foul despite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They leave the vale, and by a crooked road</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And long ascend, now wheeling left, now right:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor till the sun is hidden in the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon their weary way repose the three.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>They to a hamlet on the summit wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scaling the mountain's steep and rugged side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such good shelter and good supper found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As could by such rude quarters be supplied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arriving there, they turned their eyes around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And full of women every place espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some old, some young; nor, mid so large a clan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared the visage of a single man.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Not more bold Jason wondered, and the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which sailed with him, that Argonautic crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing those dames that had their husbands slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fathers and sons and brethren, — so that through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All Lemnos' pleasant isle, by hill or plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of manly visage they beheld not two —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than here Rogero, and the rest who go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With good Rogero, wonder at this show.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The martial damsels bid for Ulany,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those who came with her, provide attire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gowns that eve are furnished for the three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If meaner than their own, at least entire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him a woman of that villagery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Valiant Rogero summons, to inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where are the men; in that he none descries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus to him that village wife replies:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"What haply is to you a wonderment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This crowd of womankind, where man is none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To us is grave and grievous punishment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, banished here, live wofully alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, that such exile us may more torment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From those so loved, as brother, father, son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A long divorce and cruel we sustain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As our fell tyrant pleases to ordain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Sent to these confines from his land, which lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But two leagues distant thence, where we were born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Us in this place the fell barbarian sties,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having first done us many a brutal scorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And has with death and all extremities</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threatened our kinsmen and ourselves forlorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If they come hither, or he hears report</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We harbour them, when hither they resort.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>"He to our name is such a deadly foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will not have us nearer than I shewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now have us of our kin approached, as though</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Infection from the female sex ensued.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already have the greenwood trees laid low</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their leafy honours twice, and twice renewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since our lord's fury to such pitch arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now is there one his phrensy to oppose.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>"For he has spread such passing fear among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The people, death can cause no worse affright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that, beside his natural love of wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He is endowed with more than human might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He than a hundred other men more strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In body is of a gigantic height:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor us his vassals he molests alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But worse by him to stranger dame is done.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>"If your own honour, sir, and of those three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath your charge, to you in aught is dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twill safer, usefuller, and better be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To leave this road, and by another steer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This leads you to his tower, described by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To prove the savage use that cruel peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has there established, to the shame and woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of dame or cavalier, who thither go.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"This castellain or tyrant, Marganor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So name the felon knight) than whom more fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nero was not, nor other heretofore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If other be, whose actions Fame doth swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thirsts for man's blood, but thirsts for woman's more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than wolf for blood of lambs; and bids expel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With shame all females, that, in evil hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their fortune has conducted to his tower."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>How in that impious man such fury grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Asked young Rogero and those damsels twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prayed she would in courtesy pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yea, rather from the first her tale explain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"That castle's lord, fierce, and inhumane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet for a while his wicked heart concealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor what he was so suddenly revealed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>"For in the lifetime of his sons, a pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That differed much from the paternal style,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Since they the stranger loved; and loathers were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of cruelty and other actions vile)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flourished the courtesies and good customs there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there were gentle deeds performed this while:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For. albeit avaricious was the sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He never crossed the youths in their desire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"The cavaliers and dames who journeyed by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That castle, there so well were entertained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they departed, by the courtesy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those two kindly brothers wholly gained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the holy orders of fair chivalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alike the youthful pair had been ordained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cylander one, Tanacro hight the other;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bold, and of royal mien each martial brother;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And truly were, and would have been alway</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthy of every praise and fame, withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had they not yielded up themselves a prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To that uncurbed desire, which Love we call;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which they were seduced from the right way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into foul Error's crooked maze; and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The good that by those brethren had been wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waxed, in a moment, rank, corrupt and naught.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"It chanced, that in their father's fortilage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A knight of the Greek emperor's court did lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him his lady was; of manners sage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor fairer could be craved by wishful eye:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For her Cylander felt such amorous rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He deemed, save he enjoyed her, he should die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He deemed that, when the lady should depart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His soul as well would from his body part:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"And, for he knew 'twas useless to entreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Devised to make her his by force of hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed, and in silence, near his father's seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where must pass knight and lady, took his stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through natural daring and through amorous heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with too little thought the matter planned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that, when he beheld the knight advance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He issued, to assail him, lance to lance.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>"To overthrow him, at first shock he thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to win dame and palm in the career;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that Greek knight, in warlike strife well-taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shivered, like glass, his breastplate with the spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bitter tidings to the sire were brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who bade bear home the stripling on a bier:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, finding he was dead, loud mourning made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him in earth, beside his fathers, layed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Yet harbourage and welcome as before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had he who sought it; neither more nor less:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because Tanacro in his courteous lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equalled his brother as in gentleness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither that very year, from foreign shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A baron and his wife their steps address:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A marvel he of valour, and as fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As could be said, is she, and debonnair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>"No fairer was the dame than chaste and right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well deserving every praise; the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Derived of generous stock, and bold in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As ever champion, of whose fame we hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And 'tis well fitting, that such valiant wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should joy a thing so excellent and dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olindro he, the lord of Lungavilla,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she, his lady wife, yclept Drusilla.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"No less for her the young Tanacro glows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than for that other burned Cylander sore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who brought erewhile to sad and bitter close</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wicked love he to that lady bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The holy, hospitable laws he chose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To violate no less than he, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would endure, that him, with venomed sting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His new desire to cruel death should bring.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"But he, because he has before his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The example of his elder brother slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thinks to bear off the lady in such wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That bold Olindro cannot venge the stain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Straight spent in him, not simply weakened, lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The virtue, wont Tancaro to sustain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above that flood of vice, in whose profound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And miry waters Marganor lay drowned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>"That night, he in deep silence bade array</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A score of armed men; and next conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into some caverns, bordering on the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And distant from the tower, his ambuscade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The roads were broken, and the following day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olindro from all sides was overlaid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, though he made a brave defence and long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of wife and life was plundered by that throng.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Olindro slain, they led his lady fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A captive thence, o'erwhelmed with sorrow so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she refused to live, and made her prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tanacro, as a grace, would death bestow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved to die, she leapt, in her despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From a high bank into a vale below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But death was to the wretched dame refused;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who lay with shattered head and sorely bruised.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"She could not to the castle be conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In other guise than borne upon a bier:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her (so Tanacro bids) prompt leeches aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he will not lose a prey so dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And while to cure Drusilla they essayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Busied about their spousals was the peer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that so chaste a lady and so fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A wife's and not a leman's name should wear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"He had no other thought, no other aim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No other care, nor spake beside of ought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saw he had wronged her, and took all the blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as he could, to amend his error wrought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all was vain; the more he loved the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The more be to appease her anger sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So much more was her hate; so much more will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So much more thirst had she that youth to kill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Yet hatred blinded not her judgment so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But what the dame could clearly comprehend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she, if she would strike the purposed blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must feign, and secret snares for him extend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her desire beneath another show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Which is but how Tanacro to offend)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must mask; and make him think, that overblown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is her first love, and turned to him alone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Her face speaks peace; while vengeance inwardly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her heart demands, and but to this attends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She many things revolves, accepts, puts by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or, as of doubtful issue, some suspends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming she can, if she resolves to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Compass her scheme, with this resolve she ends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And better how can she expend her breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than in avenging dear Olindro's death?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"She showed herself all joyful, on her part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And feigned that she desired those nuptials sore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor only showed an unreluctant heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all delay and hindrance overbore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Painted and tired above the rest with art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twould seem, she of her husband thinks no more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But 'tis her will, that in her country's wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tanacro shall their wedding solemnize.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"The custom howsoever was not true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which as her country's use she certified;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, because never thought within her grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which she could spend on any thing beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A falsehood she devised, whence hope she drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of killing him by whom her husband died;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And told Tanacro — and the manner said —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How in her country's fashion she would wed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `The widow that a husband's bed ascends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere she approach the bridegroom (said that fair)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The spirit of the dead, whom she offends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must soothe with solemn office, mass and prayer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the holy temple making her amends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where her first husband's bones entombed are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— That sacrifice performed — to bind their vows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The nuptial ring the bridegroom gives the spouse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>" `But the holy priest, while this shall be about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon wine, thither for that purpose sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His orisons, appropriate and devout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blessing withal the liquor, shall have said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then from the flask into a cup pour out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And give the blessed wine to them that wed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But 'tis the spouse's part to take the cup;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And first that vessel's cordial beverage sup.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"The unsuspecting youth, who takes no heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What nuptials, ordered in her wise, import,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At her own pleasure bids the dame proceed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that she cut his terms of waiting short;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor does the miserable stripling read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She would avenge Olindro in that sort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on one object is so sore intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sees but that, on that alone is bent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"An ancient woman, seized with her whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And left, withal, obeyed Drusilla, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That beldam called and whispered in her ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So as that none beside could hear the two —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A poison of quick power for me prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such as, I know, thou knowest how to brew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bottle it; for I have found a way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The traitorous son of Marganor to slay;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `And me and thee no less can save,' (she said,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">`And this at better leisure will explain.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The woman went her ways, the potion made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the palace bent her steps again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A flask of Candian sweet wine she purveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith Drusilla sheathed that deadly bane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And kept the beverage for the nuptial day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For now had ceased all hindrance and delay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"On the fixt day she seeks the temple, dight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With precious jewels and with goodly gear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where her lord's tomb, befitting such a knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Built by her order, two fair pillars rear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The holy office there, with solemn rite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is sung, which men and women troop to hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And — gay, beyond his usage — with his heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Begirt by friends, Sir Marganor is there.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"When the holy obsequies at last were o'er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the priest was blest the poisoned draught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He into a fair golden cup did pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wine, as by Drusilla had been taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She drank what sorted with her sex; nor more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than would effect the purpose which she sought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to the bridegroom, with a jocund eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Handed the draught, who drained the goblet dry.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>"The cup returned — Tanacro, blithe and gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Opened his arms Drusilla to embrace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then altered was her sweet and winning way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to a tempest that long calm gave place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She thrust him back, she motioned him away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She seemed to kindle in her eyes and face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the youth, with broken voice and dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— `Traitor, stand off,' — the furious lady said; —</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Shalt thou then joy and solace have from me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I tears from thee, and punishment and woe?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now these mine hands shall make an end of thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This, if thou know'st it not, for poison know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much grieve I that thou should'st too honoured be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the executioner who deals the blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should'st die a death too easy: since I wot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thee too shameful hand or pain is not.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `In seeing this thy death, it gives me pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My sacrifice should be completed ill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For could I do by thee as I were fain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nothing should lack that purpose to fulfill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May my sweet consort not the work disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for the imperfect deed accept the will!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, without power to compass what I would,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I have been fain to slay thee as I could!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `And that deserved punishment, which I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cannot, as I desire, on thee bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I hope thy soul shall have; hope to be nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see thee suffer, in the realms of woe.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her turbid eyes then raising to the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With joyous face all over in a glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(She cried) `Olindro, take this victim's life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the good will of thine avenging wife;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>" `And of our lord for me the grace obtain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be this day in paradise with thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he reply, none cometh to your reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without desert; say such I bring with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who this fell impious monster, in his fane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Offer, as my first-fruits; and what can be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A greater merit than to have supprest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such loathsome and abominable pest?'</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Her life, together with her speech, was spent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, even dead, her face appeared to glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With joy, at having dealt such punishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him, that laid her cherished husband low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If fierce Tanacro's spirit did prevent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of follow hers, I wiss not; but, I trow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prevented, for on him that venom rank</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet faster wrought, because he deeper drank.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Marganor, who beheld his only son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fall and expire, his outstretched arms between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well nigh had with Tanacro died, o'erthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By that so sudden grief and unforeseen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two sons he had, and now was left alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brought to that pass he by two wives had been;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This was the cause one spent his vital breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her own hand, that dealt the other death.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Love, pity, sorrow, anger, and desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of death and vengeance, all together rend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rack the childless and unhappy sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who groans like sea, when wind and waves contend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the dame, with vengeful thoughts afire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He goes, but sees that life is at an end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, goaded by his rage and hatred hot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeks to offend her corse that feels it not.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"As serpent, by the pointed spear pinned down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fixes his teeth in it, with fruitless spire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or as the mastiff runs towards a stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which has been flung by some wayfaring wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gnaws it in his rage, nor will be gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he venge himself; 'tis so the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than any mastiff, any serpent, worse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Offends Drusilla's cold and lifeless corse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"And, for he venteth not, nor slakes his mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By foul abuse upon the carcase done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among the women, a large multitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He springs, and there shows mercy unto none.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mown are we with his impious sword, as strewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is grass with scythe, when dried by summer sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is no 'scape; for straightways of our train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are full a hundred maimed, and thirty slain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>"He of his vassals is so held in dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is no man who dares to lift his eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The women with the meaner sort are fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whosoever can, the temple flies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His friends against the furious fit make head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At last, with kind constraint and suppliant cries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, leaving every thing in tears below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him in his castle on the rock bestow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"His wrath enduring still, to send away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wretch determines all the female band:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that, his will us utterly to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His people and his friends, with prayer, withstand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he bids punish, on that very day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An order for us all to leave his land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Placed such his pleasures on these confines: woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To them that nearer to his castle go!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Thus husbands from their wives divided are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mothers from sons: if hither to resort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Despite that order, any one should dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let none know this, who might the deed report!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For sorely mulcted for the transgression were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many, and many slain in cruel sort.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A statute for his town next made the peer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fouler law we neither read nor hear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"It wills, all women found within the vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For thither even yet will some descend,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His men with rods shall on the shoulders whale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And into exile from those countries send;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first their gowns shall clip, and parts unveil</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That decency and natural shame offend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if with escort of an armed knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Any wend thither, they are slain outright.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Those that an armed warrior's escort have,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By this ill man, to piety a foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are dragged as victims to his children's grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where his own hand inflicts the murderous blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stript ignominiously of armour, glaive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And steed, their champions to his prisons go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this can he compel; for, night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand men the tyrant's hest obey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"And I will add, moreover, 'tis his will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Does he free any one, he first shall swear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the holy wafer, that he still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To woman, while he lives, will hatred bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If then these ladies and yourself to spill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seem good to you, to yonder walls repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And put to proof withal, if prowess more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or cruelty prevails in Marganor."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>So saying, in those maids of martial might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First she such pity moved and then disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they (had it been day instead of night)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would then have gone against that castellain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There rest the troop; and when Aurora's light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Serves as a signal to the starry train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they should all before the sun recede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They don the cuirass and remount the steed:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And now, in act to go, that company</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind them hear the stony road resound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a long trample, when those warlike three</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Look down the vale and roll their eyes around;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they from thence, a stone's-throw distant, see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A troop, which through a narrow pathway wound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A score they are perhaps in number, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On horseback, or on foot, their way pursue.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>They with them on a horse a woman haul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Whom stricken sore in years her visage shows,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In guise wherein some doleful criminal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Condemned to gallows, fire, or prison goes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, notwithstanding that wide interval,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is by her features known, as well as clothes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They of the village, mid the cavalcade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Know her for fair Drusilla's chamber maid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The chamber wench, made prisoner with his prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the rapacious stripling, as I shewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who being trusted with that ill emprize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The poisoned draught of foul effect had brewed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the others she and those solemnites</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had kept away, suspecting what ensued:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yea, this while, from that lordship had she fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where she in safety hoped to hide her head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>News being after to her foeman brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she retired in Ostericche lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, with intent to burn the woman, sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To have her in his power by every way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And finally unhappy Avarice, bought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By costly presents, and by proffered pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wrought on a lord, assured upon whose lands</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beldam lived, to put her in his hands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>He on a sumpter horse the prisoner sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Constance-town, like merchandise addrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fastened and bound in manner to prevent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The use of speech, and prisoned in a chest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From whence that rabble, his ill instrument,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who has all pity banished from his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had hither brought her, that his impious rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That cruel man might on the hag assuage.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>As the flood, swoln with Vesulo's thick snows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The farther that it foams upon its way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with Ticino and Lambra, seaward goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ada, and other streams that tribute pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So much more haughty and impetuous flows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero so, the more he hears display</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marganor's guilt, and so that gentle pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of damsels filled with fiercer choler are.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Them with such hatred, them with such disdain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the wretch so many crimes incense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they will punish him, despite the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or armed men arraid in his defence:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But speedy death appears too kind a pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And insufficient for such foul offence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better they deem, mid pangs prolonged and slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He all the bitterness of death should know.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>But first 'tis right that woman to unchain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She whom the hangman-crew to death escort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the quick rowel and the loosened rein</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made the quick coursers make that labour short.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never had those assaulted to sustain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encounter of so fell and fierce a sort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who held it for a grace, with loss of shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Harness and captive dame, to quit the field;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>Even as the wolf, who, laden with his prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is homeward to his secret cavern bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, when he deems that safest is the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beholds it crost by hunter and by hound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flings down his load, and swiftly darts away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where most o'ergrown with brushwood is the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor quicker are that band to void the vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than those bold three are quicker to assail.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Not only they the dame and martial gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But many horses they as well forsook;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as the surest refuge in their fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast themselves down from bank and caverned nook:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which pleased the damsels and the youthful peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who three of those forsaken horses took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To mount those three, whom, through the day before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon their croups the three good coursers bore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Thence, lightened thus, their way they thither bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where that despiteous, shameful, lordship lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved the beldam in their band shall wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see Drusilla venged; in vain denies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That woman, who misdoubts the adventure's end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grieves, and shrieks, and weeps in piteous wise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For flinging her upon Frontino's croup,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero bears her off amid the troop.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>They reached a summit, and from thence espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A town with many houses, large and rich;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With nought to stop the way on any side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As neither compassed round by wall or ditch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A rock was in the middle, fortified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a tall tower, upon its topmost pitch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fearlessly thither pricked the warriors, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marganor's mansion in that fortress knew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>As soon as in the town that cavalcade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived, some footmen, who kept watch and ward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind those warriors closed a barricade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While that, before, they found already barred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lo! Sir Marganor, with men arraid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some foot, some horsemen! armed was all the guard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to the strangers, in few words, but bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wicked custom of his lordship told.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa, who had planned the thing whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Aymon's daughter and the youthful knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For answer, spurred against the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, valiant as she was and full of might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not putting in the rest her puissant spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or baring that good sword, so famed in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So smote him with her fist upon the head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That on his horse's neck he fell half dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>The maid of France is with Marphisa gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor in the rear it seen Rogero's crest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with those two his course so bravely run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, though his lance he raised not from the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Six men he slew; transfixed the paunch of one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another's head, of four the neck or breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I' the sixth he broke it, whom in flight he speared:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It pierced his spine and at his paps appeared.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>As many as are touched, so many lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On earth, by Bradamant's gold lance o'erthrown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She seems a bolt, dismist form burning sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, in its fury, shivers and beats down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whatever it encounters, far and nigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some fly to plain, or castle from the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Others to sheltering church and house repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And none, save dead, are seen in street or square.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile the hands of Marganor, behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His back, the fierce Marphisa had made fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to Drusilla's maid the wretch consigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well pleased that such a care on her was cast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To burn the town 'twas afterwards designed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save it repented of its errors past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Repealed the statute Marganor had made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a new law, imposed by her, obeyed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Such end to compass is no hard assay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, besides fearing lest Marphisa yearn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To execute more vengeance, — lest she say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— She one and all will slaughter and will burn, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The townsmen all were advised to the sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cruel statute of that tyrant stern;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But did, as others mostly do, that best</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Obey the master whom they most detest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>Since none dares trust another, nor his will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Out of suspicion — to his comrades break,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They let him banish one, another kill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From this his substance, that his honour take.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the heart cries to Heaven, that here is still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till God and saints at length to vengeance wake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, albeit they due punishment suspend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By mighty pain the long delay amend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The rabble, full of rage and enmity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now seeks the wretch with word and deed to grieve;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As, it is said, all strip the fallen tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from its roots and wintry winds upheave:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let rulers in his sad example see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill doers in the end shall ill receive.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To view fell Marganor's disastrous fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fit penance for his sins, pleased great and small.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Many, of whom the sister had been slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mother, or the daughter, or the wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeking no more their rebel wrath to rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hurry, with their own hands to take his life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And young Rogero and the damsels twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can scarce defend the felon in that strife;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom those illustrious three had doomed to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid trouble, fear, and lengthened agony.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>To the hag, who bore such hatred to that wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As woman to an enemy can bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They give their prisoner naked, bound so tight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will not at one shake the cordage tear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she, her pains and sorrow to requite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crimsons the wretch's body, here and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a sharp goad, which, mid that village band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A peasant churl had put into her hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor she the courier maid, nor they that ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her, aye mindful how they had been shent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now let their hands hang idle by their side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less than that old crone on vengeance bent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such was their fierce desire, it nullified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The power to harm; but rage must have its vent.,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him one with stones, another with her nails,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This with her teeth, with needles that, assails.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CX-->
			<p>
				<span>As torrent one while foams in haughty tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When fed with mighty rain or melted snow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, rending form the mountain's rugged side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tree, rock, and crop and field, the waters go:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then comes a season when its crested pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is vanished, and its vigour wasted so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A child, a woman, everywhere may tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And often dry-shod cross, its rugged bed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXI-->
			<p>
				<span>So Marganor whilere each bound and bourn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made tremble, whereso'er his name was heard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now one is come to bruise the tyrant's horn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now his prowess is so little feared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That even the little children work him scorn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some pluck his hair and others pluck his beard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence young Rogero and the damsels twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards his rock-built castle turn the rein.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXII-->
			<p>
				<span>This without contest its possessors yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the rich goods preserved in that repair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These the friends partly spoiled, and partly dealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Ulany and that attendant pair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With them, recovered was the golden shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those three monarchs that were prisoned there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, without arms, afoot, towards that hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had wended, as meseems whilere was told.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>For from the day that they were overthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Bradamant, afoot, they evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unarmed, in company with her had gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hither came from her so distant shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not, I, if it was better done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or worse, by her, that they their arms forbore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worse, touching her defence; but better far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If they were losers in the doubtful war.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>For she would have been dragged, — like others, whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed men had thither brought beneath their guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Unhappy women) to the brothers' tomb, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the sacrifice knife have died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Death, sure, is worse, and more disastrous doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than showing that which modesty would hide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they who can to force ascribe the blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extinguish this and every other shame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Before they hence depart, the martial twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assemble the inhabitants, to swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They to their wives the rule of that domain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will leave, as well as every other care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that they will chastise, with heavy pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whoever to oppose this law shall dare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— In fine, man's privileges, whatsoe'er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They swear, shall be conferred on woman here:</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Then make them promise never to bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Harbourage on whosoever thither sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Footman or cavalier, nor even allow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Any beneath a roof to hide his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless he swore by God and saints, or vow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet stronger made — if stronger could be said —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he the sex's cause would aye defend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foe to their foes, and woman's faithful friend;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And, if he then were wived, or ever were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Sooner or later — linked in nuptial noose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still to his wife he would allegiance bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor e'er compliance with her will refuse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa says, within the year, she there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will be, and ere the trees their foliage lose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, save she find her statute in effect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That borough fire and ruin may expect.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor hence they part ill from the filthy place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein it lay, Drusilla's corse is borne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her with her lord they in a tomb encase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with what means the town supplies, adorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drusilla's ancient woman, in this space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marganor's body with her goad has torn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who only grieves she has not wind enow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No respite to his torture to allow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Beside a church, the martial damsels twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold a pillar, standing in the square;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereon the wicked lord of the domain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had graved that mad and cruel law; the pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In imitation, his helm, plate, and chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shield, in guise of trophy fasten there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And afterwards upon the pillar trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That law they had enacted for the place.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Within the town the troop set up their rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until the law is graved, of different frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From that before upon the stone imprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which every woman doom'd to death and shame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the intention to replace her vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here from that band divides the Islandick dame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who deems, at court 'twere shameful to appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless adorned and mantled as whilere.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Here Ulany remained, and in her power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remained the wicked tyrant Marganor:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, lest he any how, in evil hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should break his bonds and injure damsel more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made him, one day, leap headlong from a tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who never took so still a leap before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more of her and hers! I of the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That journey toward Arles, the tale pursue.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Throughout all that and the succeeding day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till the forenoon, proceed those banded friends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, where the main-road branches, and one way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the camp, to Arles the other tends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again embrace the lovers, and oft say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A last farewell, which evermore offends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsels seek the camp; to Arles is gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero; and my canto I have done.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
