<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XLII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-42" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>The victory with Count Orlando lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But good Rinaldo and Bradamant at heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(One for Angelica, the other sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For young Rogero) suffer cruel smart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him that in chase of the Indian damsel hies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disdain preserves; from thence does he depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards Italy, and is with courteous cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And welcome guested by a cavalier.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>What bit, what iron curb is to be found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or (could it be) what adamantine rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That can make wrath keep order and due bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And within lawful limits him contain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When one, to whom the constant heart is bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And linked by Love with solid bolt and chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We see, through violence or through foul deceit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With mortal damage or dishonour meet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>And is the mind sometimes, if so possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To ill and savage action led astray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It may deserve excuse; in that the breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more is under Reason’s sovereign sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Achilles, when, beneath his borrowed crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He saw Patroclus crimsoning the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was with his murderer’s slaughter ill content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he his mangled corse had dragged and shent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Unconquered Duke Alphonso, anger so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflamed thy host<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-491" id="noteref-491" epub:type="noteref">491</a> the day that weighty stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wounded thy forehead with such grievous blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That all believed it to its rest was gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Inflamed them with such fury, for the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In rampart, fosse, or wall, defence was none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, one and all, within their works lay dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor wight was left the woeful news to spread.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>Seeing thy fall caused thine such mighty pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They were to fury moved: hadst thou, my lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Maintained thy footing, haply might thy train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have with less licence plied the murderous sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enough for thee thy Bastìa to regain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fewer hours replaced beneath thy ward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then Cordova’s and fierce Granada’s band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Took days erewhile, to wrest it from thy hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>Haply Heaven’s vengeance ordered what befel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in that case thy wound so hindered thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the end, the cruel outrage, foul and fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Done by that band before, should punished be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For after the unhappy Vestidel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-492" id="noteref-492" epub:type="noteref">492</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wearied and hurt, had sought their clemency,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among them (mostly an unchristened train)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, mid a hundred swords, unarmed, was slain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>To end; I say that other rage is none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which can be weighed with <em>that</em> in equal wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which kindles, when an injury is done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To kinsman, friend or lord before our eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then justly in Orlando’s heart, for one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So dear to him, might sudden fury rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When him he saw, extended on the sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slain by the stroke of fierce Gradasso’s brand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>As nomade swain, who darting on its way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In slippery line the horrid snake has seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That his young son, amid the sands at play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has killed with venomed tooth, enflamed with spleen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grasps his batoon, the poisonous worm to slay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His sword, than every other sword more keen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, in his fury grasped Anglantes’ knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wreaked on Agramant his first despite,</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Scaped, bleeding, with helm loosened form his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With half a shield and swordless, through his mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore wounded in more places than is said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As from the dull or envious falcon’s nail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Escapes the unhappy sparrowhawk, half dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With ruffled plumage and with loss of tail.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-493" id="noteref-493" epub:type="noteref">493</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On him Orlando came and smote him just</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where with the helmed head confined the bust.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>Loosed was the helm, the neck without its band:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, like a rush, was severed by the sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Down-fell, and shook its last upon the sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heavy trunk of Libya’s mighty lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His spirit, which flitted to the Stygian strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charon with crooked boat-hook dragged aboard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On him Orlando wastes no further pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, sword in hand, seeks him of Sericane.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>As the headless trunk of Afric’s cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extended on the shore Gradasso’s viewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(What never had befallen him whilere)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He shook at heart, a troubled visage shewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, at the coming of Anglantes’ peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Presageful of his fate, appears subdued:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-494" id="noteref-494" epub:type="noteref">494</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor seeks he means of fence against his foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When fierce Orlando deals the fatal blow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando levels at his better side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the lowest rib, his faulchion bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And crimsoned to the hilt, a hand’s breadth wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the other flank, the sword appears in sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well his mighty puissance testified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And spoke him as the strongest living knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That stroke, by which a warrior was undone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better than whom in Paynimry was none.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>Little his victory good Orlando cheers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself he quickly from his saddle throws;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with a face disturbed, and wet with tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his Brandimart in haste the warrior goes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The field about him red with blood appears,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-495" id="noteref-495" epub:type="noteref">495</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His helmet cleft as by a hatchet’s blows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, had it been than spungy rind more frail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have defended him no worse than mail.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando lifts the helmet, and descries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brandimart’s head by that destructive brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cleft even to his nose, between the eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet so the wounded knight his spirits manned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That pardon of the king of Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, before death, was able to demand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to exhort to patience Brava’s peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose manly cheeks were wet with many a tear;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And⁠—“Roland, in thy helping orisons, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beseech thee to remember me,” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Nor recommend to thee less warmly my⁠—”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-496" id="noteref-496" epub:type="noteref">496</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Flordelice would, but could not, say⁠—and died;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sounds and songs of angels in the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the soul parts, are heard on every side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from its prison freed, mid hymns of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ascends into the blissful realms above.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando, albeit he should joy in heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At death so holy, and is certified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That called to bliss above is Brandimart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he heaven opened to the knight described;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through human wilfulness⁠—which aye takes part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With our weak senses⁠—hardly can abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The loss of one, above a brother dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can refrain from many a scalding tear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Warlike Sobrino, of much blood bereaved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from his flank and wounded visage rained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long since had fallen, reversed and sore aggrieved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had by now his vessels well nigh drained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olivier too lies stretched; nor has retrieved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can retrieve, his crippled foot, save sprained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And almost crushed; so long between the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his stout courser jammed, the limb has lain;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And but Orlando helped (so woe begone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was weeping Olivier, and brought so low)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He could not have released his limb alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, when released, endures such pain, such woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The helpless warrior cannot stand upon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or shift withal his wounded foot, and so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Benumbed and crippled is the leg above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he without assistance cannot move.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The victory brought Orlando small delight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On whom too heavily and hardly weighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of slaughtered Brandimart the piteous sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor sure of Oliviero’s life he made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobrino yet survived; but little light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wounded monarch had, amid much shade:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For almost spend his ebbing life remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So fast from him the crimson blood had drained.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The County has him taken, bleeding sore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, where he is saved with sovereign care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he as if a kinsman of the Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Benignly comforts him and speaks him fair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For in Orlando, when the strife was o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was nothing evil; ever prompt to spare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from the dead their arms and coursers reft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest he to their knives’ disposal left.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>Here as my story stood not on good ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Frederick Fulgoso doubtful does appear;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-497" id="noteref-497" epub:type="noteref">497</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, searching Barbary’s every shore and sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile on board a squadron, landed here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the isle so rugged and so rocky found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all its parts so mountainous and drear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is not (through the land) a level space</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(He says) whereon a single boot to place.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor deems he likely, that six cavaliers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wide world’s flower, on Alpine rock should vie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that equestrian fight, with levelled spears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whose objection thus I make reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile a place, well fit for such careers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stretched at the bottom of the hills did lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But afterwards, o’erthrown by earthquake’s shock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cliff o’erspread the plain with broken rock.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>So, of Fulgoso’s race thou shining ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clear, lasting light, if, questioning my word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou on this point hast ever said me nay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And haply too, before the unconquered lord,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-498" id="noteref-498" epub:type="noteref">498</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through whom thy land, reposing, casts away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All haste, and wholly leans to kind accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prythee delay not to declare, that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this my story haply tell no lie.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile his eyes the good Orlando reared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw, on turning them to seaward, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under full sail a nimble bark appeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if she to that island would repair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will not now rehearse who thither steered;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For more than one awaiteth me elsewhere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wend me to France and see if they be glad</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At having chased the Saracens, or sad;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>See what she does withal, the lady true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That sees her knight content to wend so wide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the afflicted Bradamant I shew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After she saw the oath was nullified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made in the hearing of those armies two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the Christian and the paynim side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since he again had failed her, there was nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein she could confide, the damsel thought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>And now her too accustomed plaint and wail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Repeating, of Rogero’s cruelty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair Bradamant renewed the wonted tale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She cursed her hard and evil destiny;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then loosening to tempestuous grief the sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaven that consented to such perjury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—And did not yet by some plain token speak⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, in her passion, called unjust and weak.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The sage Melissa she accused, and cursed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The oracle of the cavern, through whose lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She in that sea of love herself immersed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon whose waters she embarked to die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She to Marphisa afterwards rehearsed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her woes, and told her brother’s perfidy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She chides, pours forth her sorrows, and demands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With tears and outcries, succour at her hands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa shrugs her shoulders; what alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She can, she offers⁠—comfort to the fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Nor thinks Rogero her has so foregone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But what to her he shortly will repair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, should he not, such outrage to be done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel plights her promise not to bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Twixt her and him shall deadly war be waged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or he shall keep the word, which he engaged.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She makes her somewhat thus her grief restrain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which having vent in some sort spend its gall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now we have seen the damsel in her pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero impious, proud, and perjured call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See we, if in a happier state remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The brother of that gentle maid withal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose flesh, bones, nerves, and sinews are a prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To burning love; Rinaldo I would say.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>I say Rinaldo that (as known to you)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica the beauteous loved so well:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor him into the amorous fillets drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So much her beauty as the magic spell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In peace reposed those other barons true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For wholly broken was the infidel:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone amid the victors, he, of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paladins, remained Love’s captive thrall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>To seek her he a hundred couriers sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sought as well, himself, the missing maid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He in the end to Malagigi went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in his need had often given him aid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him he told his love, with eyelids bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On earth, and visage crimsoned o’er; and prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That sage magicians to instruct him, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He in the world might find the long-sought fair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>A case, so strange and wondrous, marvel sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In friendly Malagigi’s bosom bred:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wizard knew, a hundred times and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He might have had the damsel in his bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he himself, to move the knight or yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In her behalf, enough had done and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had him by prayer and menace sought to bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet ne’er was able to obtain his end;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>And so much more, that out of prison-ward</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He then would Malagigi so have brought.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-499" id="noteref-499" epub:type="noteref">499</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now will he seek her, of his own accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On less occasion, when it profits nought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next that magician Montalbano’s lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To mark how sorely do had erred, besought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since little lacked, but through the boon denied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile he had in gloomy dungeon died.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But how much more Rinaldo’s strange demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sounded importunately in his ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So by sure index Malagigi scanned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That so much was Angelica more dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo prayer unable to withstand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In ocean sunk the wizard cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All memory of old injury assayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bowned himself to give the warrior aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>For his reply he craved some small delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with fair hope consoled Mount Alban’s knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“He should be able of the road to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which Angelica had sped her flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In France or wheresoe’er;” then wends his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither where he is wont his imps to cite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A grot impervious and with mountains walled:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His book he opened and the spirits called.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Then one he chooses, in love-cases read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom Malagigi to declare requires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How good Rinaldo’s heart, before so died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was now so quickly moved by soft desires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And “of those fountains twain (the demon said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereof one lights, one quenches amorous fires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how nought cures the mischief caused by one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that whose streams in counter current run;”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And says; “Rinaldo, having drunk whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the love-chasing fountain’s mossy urn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Angelica, that long had wooed the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had shown himself so obstinate and stern;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, whom after his ill star did steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To drink of that which makes the bosom burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her whom but just before he loathed above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All reason, by that draught was forced to love.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Him his ill star and cruel fate conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To swallow fire and flame i’ the frozen lake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For nigh at the same time the Indian maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the other bitter stream her thirst did slake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which in her bosom so all love allayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Henceforth she loathed him more than noisome snake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He loved her, and such love was his, as late</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo bore her enmity and hate.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Of this strange story fully certified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was Malagigi by the demon’s lore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who news as well of Angelique supplied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“How yielding up herself to a young Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him embarking on the unstable tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She had abandoned Europe’s every shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hoisting her bold canvas to the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Catalonian galley loosed for Ind.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo seeking out the sage anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For his reply⁠—“he would dissuade the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From loving more that Indian lady, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now waited on a vile barbarian wight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was so distant he could ill pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he would chase the damsel on her flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who must have measured than half her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Homeward, with young Medoro to Catay.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>In that bold lover no displeasure deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The journey of Angelica would move;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet would mar or break the warrior’s sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To think that he again must eastward rove:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that a stripling Saracen should reap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first fruits of that faithless lady’s love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In him such passion bred, such heart-ache sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He never in his life so grieved before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>No power hath he to make one sole reply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His heart, his lip, is quivering with disdain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His tongue no word is able to untie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His mouth is bitter, and ’twould seem with bane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He flung from the magician suddenly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as by fury stirred and jealous pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He after mighty plaint, and mighty woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved anew to eastern realms to go.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>Licence he asks of Pepin’s royal son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the ground, “since with his courser dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Sericane is King Gradasso gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the use of gallant cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him honour moves the self-same course to run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the end he may prevent the paynim peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From ever vaunting, that with sword or lance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He took him from a Paladin of France.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Charles gives him leave to go; though, far and nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him all France laments he thence should wend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he in fine that prayer can ill deny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So honest seems the worthy warrior’s end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him Dudon, Guido, would accompany;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he refuses either valiant friend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Paris he departs, and wends alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plunged in his grief and heaving many a groan.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Ever in memory dwells the restless thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He might a thousand times have had the fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And⁠—mad and obstinate⁠—had, when besought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand times refused such beauty rare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such sweet joy was whilom set at nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such bright, such blessed moments wasted were;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now he life would gladly give away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To have that damsel but for one short day.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>The thought will never from his mind depart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How for a sorry footpage she could slight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Flinging their merit and their love apart⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The service of each former loving wight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vext by such thought, which racked and rent his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo wends towards the rising light:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He the straight road to Rhine and Basle pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he arrived in Arden’s mighty wood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>When within that adventurous wood has hied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For many a mile Montalban’s cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of lonely farm or lordly castle wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the rude place was roughest and most drear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sky disturbed he suddenly descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He saw the sun’s dimmed visage disappear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And spied forth issuing from a cavern hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A monster, which a woman’s likeness wore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>A thousand lidless eyes are in her head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She cannot close them, nor, I think, doth sleep:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She listens with as many ears, and spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like hair, about her forehead serpents creep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forth issued into day that figure dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From devilish darkness and the caverned deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For tail, a fierce and bigger serpent wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About her breast, and girt the monster round.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>What in a thousand, thousand quests had ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Befal’n Rinaldo, here befell the knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, when he sees the horrid form appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Coming to seek him and prepared for fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feels in his inmost veins such freezing fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As haply never fell on other wight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet wonted daring counterfeits and feigns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with a trembling hand the faulchion strains.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The monster so the fierce assault did make</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Therein her master was well descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It might be said; she shook a poisonous snake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now on this, now on the other side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leapt at the knight; at her Rinaldo strake</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ever meanwhile with random blows and wide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With forestroke, backstroke, he assails the foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He often smites, but never plants a blow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>The monster threw a serpent at his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That froze his heart beneath its iron case;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now through the vizor flung the poisonous pest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which crept about his collar and his face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dismayed, Rinaldo fled the field, and prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all his spurs his courser through the chase:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not behind the hellish monster halts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in a thought upon the crupper vaults.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>Wend where the warrior will, an-end or wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ever with him is that accursed Pest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor knows he how from her to be untied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit his courser plunges without rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like a leaf quakes his heart within his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that the snakes in other mode molest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But they such horror and such loathing bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He shrieks, he groans, and gladly would be dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>By gloomiest track and blindest path he still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threaded the tangled forest here and there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By thorniest valley and by roughest hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wheresoever darkest was the air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus hoping to have rid him of that ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hideous, abominable, poisonous Care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath whose gripe he foully might have fared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that one quickly to his aid repaired.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But aid, and in good time, a horseman bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equipt with arms of beauteous steel and clear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For crest, a broken yoke the stranger wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Red flames upon his yellow shield appear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So was the courser’s housing broidered o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the proud surcoat of the cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His lance he grasped, his sword was in its place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at his saddle hung a burning mace.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>That warrior’s mace a fire eternal fills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose lasting fuel ever blazes bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And goodly buckler, tempered corslet thrills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And solid helm; then needs the approaching knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must make him way, wherever ’tis his will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To turn his inextinguishable light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor of less help in need Rinaldo stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To save him from the cruel monster’s hands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>The stranger horseman, like a warrior bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he that hubbub hears, doth thither swoop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he sees the beast, whose snakes enfold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, linked in many a loathsome loop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who sweats at once with heat and quakes with cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can he thrust the monster from his croup.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived the stranger smote her in the flank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who on the near side of the courser sank:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>But scarcely was on earth extended, ere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She rose and shook her snakes in volumed spire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight no more assails her with the spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But is resolved to plague the foe with fire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He gripes the mace and thunders in her rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With frequent blows, like tempest in its ire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor leaves a moment to that monster fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To strike one stroke in answer, ill or well;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And, while he chases her or holds at bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smites her and venges many a foul affront,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Counsels the paladin, without delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take the road which scales the neighbouring mount:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He took that proffered counsel and that way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And without stop, or turning back his front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pricked furiously till he was out of sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though hard to clamber was the rugged height.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The stranger, when he to her dark retreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had driven from upper light that beast of hell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Where she herself doth ever gnaw and eat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While from her thousand eyes tears ceaseless well)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Followed the knight, to guide his wandering feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And overtook him on the highest swell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then placed himself beside the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him from those dark and gloomy parts to steer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>When him returned beheld Montalban’s knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That countless thanks were due to him,” he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“And that at all times, as a debt of right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His life should be for his advantage paid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of him he next demands, how he is hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he may know and tell who brought him aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And among worthy warriors, and before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Charles, exalt his prowess evermore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>The stranger answered; “Let it irk not thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I not now my name to thee display;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere longer by a yard the shadows be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This will I signify; a short delay.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wending together, they a river see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose murmurs woo the traveller from his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shepherd-swain, by whiles, to their green brink;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There an oblivion of their love to drink.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>My lord, that fountain’s chilling stream and clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extinguished love; Angelica of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drinking thereof, for good Montalban’s peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conceived that hate she nourished evermore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if she once displeased the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he to her such passing hatred bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this no other cause occasion gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My lord, save drinking of this chilly wave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Arriving at that limpid river’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavalier that with Rinaldo goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reined-in his courser, how with toil, and cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Here ’twere not ill, meseemeth, to repose.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“It cannot but be well” (the peer replied),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Because, beside that mid-day fiercely glows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I have so suffered from that hideous Pest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As sweet and needful shall I welcome rest.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Upon the green sward lit the martial two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While their loose horses through the forest fed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from their brows the burnished helmets threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On that flowered herbage, yellow, green, and red.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo to the liquid crystal flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By heat and thirst unto the river sped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with one draught of that cold liquor drove</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of his burning bosom thirst and love.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Whenas Rinaldo, sated with the draught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raising his head the stranger knight espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw that he, repentant, every thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that so frantic love had put aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He reared himself, and said with semblance haught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That which he would not say before, and cried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Rinaldo, know that I am hight Disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bound hither but to break thy worthless chain.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>So saying, suddenly he passed from sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him his horse: this in Rinaldo bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much wonderment; and the astonished knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Where is he?” gazing round about him, said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He cannot guess if ’twere a magic sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fiend by Malagigi thither sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From those his ministers, to break the chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fettered whereby he lived so long in pain;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Of if an angel from the heavenly sphere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his ineffable goodness by the Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dispatched, as to Tobias’s aid whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A medicine for his blindness to afford.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But good or evil angel⁠—whatsoe’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He was that him to liberty restored⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him thanked and praised Rinaldo, for a heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Healed only by his help of amorous smart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Old hate revived upon Rinaldo’s side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor he alone unworthy to be wooed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel deemed by pilgrimage so wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her half a league he would not have pursued.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nathless anew Bayardo to bestride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Sericane would go that warrior good:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well because his honour him compelled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As for the talk which he with Charles had held.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He pricked to Basle upon the following day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither the tidings had arrived before:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That Count Orlando was, in martial fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To meet Gradasso and the royal Moor:”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor through Orlando was divulged that say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But one, who crost from the Sicilian shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thither had, in haste, the journey made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As certain news, the tidings had conveyed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo had gladly been at Roland’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from that battle far himself doth see:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Every ten miles he changes horse and guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whips and spurs, and makes his courser flee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He crost the Rhine at Constance, forward hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He traversed Alp, arrived in Italy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He left Verona, Mantua, in his rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And reached and past the Po, with swift career.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Much towards eve already sloped the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the first star was glimmering in the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, doubting on the bank if he shall run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another course, or in some hostel lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until the shades of night and vapours dun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before Aurora’s beauteous visage fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cavalier approaching him he viewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who courtesy in face and semblance shewed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>He, after greeting him, “if he were tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In wedlock,” made in gentle wise demand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, wondering what the quest implied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made answer; “I am bound in nuptial band.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“I joy thereat,” the cavalier replied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, that he might this saying understand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Added, “I pray that you, sir knight, within</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My mansion will this eve be pleased to inn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“For I will make you see what must please</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A wight” (pursued the stranger) “that is wed.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, as well that he would take his ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—But this, with so long posting sore bested⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that to see and hear strange novelties</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By natural desire he still was led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His offer takes, and enters a new road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Following that cavalier to his abode.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>A bowshot from the way diverged the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a great palace fronting them descried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence squires with blazing lights (a numerous crew)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Issued, and chased the darkness far and wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Entering, his eyes around Rinaldo threw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw a place, whose like is seldom spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of beauteous fabric, and well ordered plan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor such huge cost befitted private man.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Of serpentine and of hard porphyry are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stones which form the gateway’s arch above.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of bronze the portal leaves, which figures bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose lively features seem to breathe and move.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the vaulted entry, colours rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cheating the eye, in mixt mosaic strove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The quadrangle within was galleried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of a hundred yards, on every side.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>A gateway is there to each galleried row,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, ’twixt it and that gate, an arch is bent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of equal breadth, but different in their show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the architect had spared not ornament.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each arch an entrance was; up which might go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A laden horse; so easy the ascent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-500" id="noteref-500" epub:type="noteref">500</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To arch above leads every stair withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every arch is entrance to a hall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Above, project the arches in such sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They for the spacious portals form a shade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And each two pillars has for its support:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of bronze are some, and some of marble made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ornamented chambers of the court</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too many are to be at length displayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With easements, which (beside what is in sight)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The skilful master underground had dight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Tall columns, with their capitals of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which gemmed entablatures support in air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exotic marbles which adorn that hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By skilfull hand engraved with figures fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Picture and cast, and works so manifold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit by night they mostly hidden were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Showed that two kings’ united treasure ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have sufficed such gorgeous pile to rear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Above the beauteous ornaments and rich</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That mingled in that gay quadrangle meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is a fresh and plenteous fountain, which</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scatters in many threads its watery sheet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis here that youths at equal distance pitch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ the middle, tables for the festive treat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence they four gates of that rich mansion see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seen from those four gates as well may be.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>By cunning master, diligent and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With much and subtle toil, the fount was made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In open gallery or pavilion’s guise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from eight separate fronts, projects a shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A gilded roof, which with enamelled dyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was stained below, the building overlayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eight marble statues (snowy was the grain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the left arm that gilded roof sustain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Fair Amalthaea’s horn in the right hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had quaintly sculptured the ingenious master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence water, trickling forth with murmur bland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descends into a vase of alabaster;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, in likeness of a lady grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sovereign art had fashioned each pilaster.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Various they were in visage and in vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all of equal charms and grace possest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Upon two beauteous images below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each of these female statues fix their feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lower seem with open mouth to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That song and harmony to them are sweet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, by their attitude, ’twould seem, as though</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their every work and every study meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In praising them, they on their shoulders bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As they would those whose likenesses they wear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>The images below them in their hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long scrolls and of an ample size contain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which of the worthiest figures of that band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The several names with mickle praise explain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well their own at little distance stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inscribed upon that scroll, in letters plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, by the help of blazing lights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marked, one by one, the ladies and their knights.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The first inscription there which meets the eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Recites at length Lucretia Borgia’s fame,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-501" id="noteref-501" epub:type="noteref">501</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom Rome should place, for charms and chastity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above that wife who whilom bore her name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strozza and Tebaldéo<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-502" id="noteref-502" epub:type="noteref">502</a>⁠—Anthony</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Hercules⁠—support the honoured dame:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So says the scroll); for tuneful strain, the pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A very Linus and an Orpheus are.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>A statue no less jocund, no less bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Succeeds, and on the writing is impressed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Lo! Hercules’ daughter, Isabella hight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-503" id="noteref-503" epub:type="noteref">503</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In whom Ferrara deems her city blest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much more because she first shall see the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within its circuit, than for all the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which kind and favouring Fortune in the flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of rolling years, shall on that town bestow.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>The pair that such desirous ardour shew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That aye her praises should be widely blown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">John James alike are named: of those fair two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One is Calandra, one is Bardelon.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-504" id="noteref-504" epub:type="noteref">504</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the third place, and fourth, where trickling through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Small rills, the water quits that octagon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two ladies are there, equal in their birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equal in country, honour, charms and worth.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>One was Elizabeth, one Eleanor,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-505" id="noteref-505" epub:type="noteref">505</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if we credit what that marble said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Manto’s so glorious city which such store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sets my melodious Maro, whom she bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More vaunts not him, nor reverences more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than these fair dames her poet’s honoured head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first of these her hallowed feet had set</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On Peter Bembo and James Sadolet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-506" id="noteref-506" epub:type="noteref">506</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Arelio and Castiglion,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-507" id="noteref-507" epub:type="noteref">507</a> a polished pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That other lady, in mid air, sustain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their names were carved upon the marble fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then both unknown, and now so fames a twain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next was a lady, that from Heaven shall heir</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As mighty virtue as on earth doth reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or ever yet hath reigned, in any age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well proved by Fortune in her love or rage.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Inscribed in characters of gold is here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lucretia Bentivoglia,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-508" id="noteref-508" epub:type="noteref">508</a> and among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her praises, ’tis declared Ferrara’s peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Joys that such daughter doth to him belong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her shall Camillus voice,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-509" id="noteref-509" epub:type="noteref">509</a> and far and near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reno and Felsina shall hear his song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wrapt in as mighty wonder at the strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that wherewith Amphrysus heard his swain;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-510" id="noteref-510" epub:type="noteref">510</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And one, through whom that city’s name (where sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Isaurus salts his wave in larger vase)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fame shall from Africa to Ind repeat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From southern tracts to Hyperborean ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than because Rome’s gold in that famed seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was weighed, whereof perpetual record says<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-511" id="noteref-511" epub:type="noteref">511</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guy Posthumus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-512" id="noteref-512" epub:type="noteref">512</a>⁠—about whose honoured brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Phoebus and Pallas bind a double bough.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>Dian is next<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-513" id="noteref-513" epub:type="noteref">513</a> in order of that train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Regard not (said the marble) is she wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A haughty port: for in her heart, humane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The matron is, as in her visage, fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Learned Cèlio Calcagnine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-514" id="noteref-514" epub:type="noteref">514</a> in lofty strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her glories and fair name abroad shall bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Juba’s and Moneses’ kingdom hear,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-515" id="noteref-515" epub:type="noteref">515</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Spain, and farthest Ind, his trumpet clear;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>And a Cavallo<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-516" id="noteref-516" epub:type="noteref">516</a> shall make such a font</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of poetry in famed Ancona run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that winged courser on Parnassus’ mount;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or was it on the hill of Helicon?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis Beatrice,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-517" id="noteref-517" epub:type="noteref">517</a> who next uprears her front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereof so speaks the writing on the stone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Her consort Beatrice, while she has breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blesses, and leaves unhappy at her death;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Yea, Italy; that with her triumphs bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without that lady fair shall captive be.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lofty song appears of her to indite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lord of the Correggio’s noble tree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, Benedèo’s pride, Timotheus hight.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-518" id="noteref-518" epub:type="noteref">518</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between his banks, descending to the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By their joint music shall the stream be stopt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose trees erewhile the liquid amber dropt.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-519" id="noteref-519" epub:type="noteref">519</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Between this and that lofty column’s place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into fair Borgia fashioned (as was said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of aspect so distinguished, of such grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lady was, of alabaster made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, hiding in a simple veil her face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In sable, without gems or gold arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, ’mid the brightest, flung her light as far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As amid lesser fires the Cyprian star.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>None knows, observing her with steadfast view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she of charms or grace have fuller store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether her visage most majestic shew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or beam with genius or with beauty more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“He that would speak⁠—would speak her praises true⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Declares in fine the sculptured marble’s lore)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fairest of emprizes would intend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But never bring his noble task to end.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>Albeit such grace and passing sweetness shewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her fair and well-wrought image, she disdain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared to nurse, that one of wit so rude</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should dare to sing her praise in humble strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he that only without comrade stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not why, her statue to sustain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The marble all those other names revealed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That pair’s alone the artist had concealed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-520" id="noteref-520" epub:type="noteref">520</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The statues in the middle form a round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The floor whereof dry stalks of coral pave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Most pleasant, cool, and grateful, is that ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So rendered by the pure and crystal wave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which vent without in other channel found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And issued forth in many a stream, to lave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mead of azure, white, and yellow hue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gladdening the plants that on their margins grew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Conversing with his courteous host, the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sate at the board, and oft and often prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That without more delay the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would keep the promise he whilere had made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And marking, ever and anon, his cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Observes his heart with some deep woe downweighed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For not a moment ’mid their converse slips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But what a burning sigh is on his lips.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Oft with desire was good Rinaldo stung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To ask that sorrow’s cause, and the request</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was almost on the gentle warrior’s tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there by courteous modesty represt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now at their banquet’s close a youth, among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The menial crew, on whom that charge did rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Placed a gold cup before the paladin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Filled full of gems without, of wine within.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The host then somedeal smiling, from the board</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Looked up at Aymon’s son; but who this while</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well marked him, as he eyed Montalban’s lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had deemed him more disposed to weep than smile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“So oft reminded, to maintain my word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis time meseems (said he, that owned the pile)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To shew the touchstone for a woman’s love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which needs to wedded man must welcome prove.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>“Ne’er, in my judgment, should the married dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be from espial by her lord released:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus shall he know if honour or if blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His portion is; if he is man or beast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The weight of horns, though coupled with such shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is of all burdens upon the earth the least.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While well-nigh all behold his antlers spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He feels them not who has them on his head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>“If certain of thy wife’s fidelity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou hast more ground to prize and hold her dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than one, whose wife is evil known to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or husband that is still in doubt and fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full many husbands live in jealousy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And groundlessly, of women chaste and clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On many women many men rely</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile, who bear their branching antlers high.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>“If thou wouldst be assured thy wife is true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As sure methinks thou thinkest and must think)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For it is hard that notion to undo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless thy trust before sure tokens sink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—No hearsay matter this⁠—thyself shalt view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The truth, if thou in this fair vessel drink,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-521" id="noteref-521" epub:type="noteref">521</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Placed solely on the supper-board, that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May’st see the marvel promised thee but now.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Drink, and a mighty marvel shall be seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if thou wearest Cornwall’s lofty crest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-522" id="noteref-522" epub:type="noteref">522</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No drop of wine shall pass thy lips between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the draught be spilt upon thy breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If faithful is thy wife, thou shalt drink clean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now⁠—to try thy fortune⁠—to the test!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He said, and with fixt eyes the sign explored;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If on his breast the wine Rinaldo poured.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo was nigh moved the cup to raise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seek what he would haply wish unsought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forward he reached his hand and took the vase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About to prove his fortune in the draught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then of the passing peril of the case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before it touched his lips, the warrior thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But let me, sir, repose myself, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will then relate the Paladin’s reply.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
