<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-28" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>To whatsoever evil tongue can tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of womankind King Rodomont gives ear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then journeys homeward; but that infidel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finds by the way a place he holds more dear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here him new love inflames for Isabel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But so the wishes of the cavalier</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A friar impedes, who with that damsel wends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him by a cruel death the felon ends.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Ladies, and all of you that ladies prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afford not, for the love of heaven, an ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To this, the landlord’s tale, replete with lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In shame and scorn of womankind; though ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was praise or fame conveyed in that which flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From such a caitiff’s tongue; and still we hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sottish rabble all things rashly brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And question most what least they understand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Omit this canto, and⁠—the tale untold⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My story will as clear and perfect be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I tell it, since by Turpin it is told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not in malice or in rivalry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besides, that never did my tongue withhold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your praises, how you are beloved by me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To you I by a thousand proofs have shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vouching I am, and can but be, your own.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Let him who will, three leaves or four pass-by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor read a line; or let him, who will read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As little of that landlord’s history,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As of a tale or fiction, make his creed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to my story:⁠—When his auditory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He saw were waiting for him to proceed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that a place was yielded him, o’eright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavalier, he ’gan his tale recite:</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Astolpho that the Lombard sceptre swayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was King Monacho, his brother’s heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By nature with such graces was purveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Few e’er with him in beauty could compare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such scarce Apelles’ pencil had pourtrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zeuxis’, or worthier yet, if worthier were:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beauteous he was, and so by all was deemed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But far more beauteous he himself esteemed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>“He not so much rejoiced that he in height</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of grandeur was exalted o’er the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that, for riches, subjects, and for might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all the neighbouring kings he was the best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that, superior to each other wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He beauty was throughout the world confest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This pleased the monarch, who the praise conferred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that wherein he most delighted, heard.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Faustus Latinus, one of his array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who pleased the king, a Roman cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hearing ofttimes Astolpho now display</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauties of his hand, now of his cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, questioned by that monarch, on a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If ever in his lifetime, far or near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He any of such beauty had espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him thus unexpectedly replied:</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Faustus to him replied: ‘By what I see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what I hear, is said by every one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Few are there that in beauty rival thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rather I those few confine to one:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Jocundo is that one, my brother he;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well I ween that, saving him alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou leavest all in beauty far behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I in him thy peer and better find.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Impossible Astolpho deemed the thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who hitherto had thought the palm his own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such a longing seized the Lombard king</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To know that youth whose praises so were blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He prest, till Faustus promised him to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The brother praised by him, before his throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Though ’twould be much if thither he repaired,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(The courier added) ‘and the cause declared:</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Because the youth had ne’er been known to measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all his life, a single pace from Rome;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, on what Fortune gave him, lived at leisure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Contented in his own paternal dome;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor had diminished nor encreased the treasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith his father had endowed that home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he more distant would Pavia deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Tanäis another would esteem;</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘And that a greater difficulty were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To tear Jocundo from his consort; who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was by such love united to that fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No other will but hers the husband knew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet at his sovereign’s hest he would repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek the stripling, and his utmost do.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The suit with offers and with gifts was crowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which for that youth’s refusal left no ground.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Faustus set forth, and, after few days’ ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reached Rome, and his paternal mansion gained:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There with entreaties so the brother plied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to that journey his consent obtained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wrought so well (though difficult to guide)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Silent even young Jocundo’s wife remained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He showing her what good would thence ensue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besides what gratitude would be her due.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Jocundo names a time to wend his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And servingmen meanwhile purveys and steeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a provision makes of fair array;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For beauty borrows grace from glorious weeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside him or about him, night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye weeping, to her lord the lady reads;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘She knows not how she ever can sustain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So long an absence, and not die with pain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘For the mere thought produced such misery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seemed from her was ravished her heart’s core.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—‘Alas! my love (Jocundo cried) let be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy sorrows’⁠—weeping with her evermore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘So may this journey prosper! as to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will I return ere yet two months are o’er;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor by a day o’erpass the term prescribed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though me the king with half his kingdom bribed.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“This brought his troubled consort small content:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, ‘that the period was too distant,’ said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, ‘that ’twould be a mighty wonderment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If her, at his return, he found not dead.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The grief which, day and night, her bosom rent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was such, that lady neither slept nor fed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that for pity oft the youth repented</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to his brother’s wishes had consented.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>“She from her neck unloosed a costly chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That a gemmed cross and holy reliques bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which one, a pilgrim of Bohemia’s reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had gathered upon many a distant shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him did her sire in sickness entertain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returning from Jerusalem of yore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence was made that dying pilgrim’s heir:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This she undoes, and gives her lord to wear;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“And round his neck entreats him, for her sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That chain in memory of herself to wind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her gift the husband is well pleased to take;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that a token needs his love to bind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For neither time, nor absence, e’er will shake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor whatsoever fortune is behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her memory, which, rooted fast and deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He still has kept, and after death will keep.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The night before that morning streaked the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fixt for his journey, to his sore dismay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her husband deemed that in his arms would die</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wife from whom he was to wend his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She slumbered not: to her a last goodbye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bade, while yet it lacked an hour of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mounted his nag, and on his journey sped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While his afflicted spouse returned to bed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Jocundo was not two miles on his road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he that jewelled cross recalled to mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he beneath his pillow had bestowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, through forgetfulness, had left behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Alas! (the youth bethought him) in what mode</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall I excuse for my omission find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that from this my consort shall not deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I little her unbounded love esteem?’</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“He pondered an excuse; then weened’ twould be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of little value, if it were exprest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By page or other⁠—save his embassy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He did himself; his brother he addrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘⁠—Now to Baccano ride you leisurely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there at the first inn set-up your rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I must back to Rome without delay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But trust to overtake you by the way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘No other but myself my need could do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doubt not but I shall speedily be back.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—No servant took he, but, with an adieu,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Jocundo, at a trot, wheeled round his hack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when that cavalier the stream was through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rising sun ’gan chase the dusky rack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At home he lighted, sought his bed, and found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The consort he had quitted sleeping sound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“He, without saying aught, the curtains drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, what he least believed, within espied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he beneath the quilt, his consort true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And chaste, saw sleeping at a stripling’s side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith Jocundo that adulterer knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By practice, of his features certified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that he was a footboy in his train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nourished by him, and come of humble strain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“To imagine his distress and wonderment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And warrant it, that other may believe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is better than to make the experiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, like this wretch, the cruel proof receive:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By anger stirred, it was his first intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To draw his sword, and both of life bereave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But love, which spite himself, he entertained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that ungrateful woman, him restrained.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“You see if like a vassal he obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This ribald Love, who left him not the force</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wake her, lest to know her guilt surveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should in his consort’s bosom move remorse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As best he could, he forth in silence made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stair descended, and regained his horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Goaded by Love, he goads his steed again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ere they reach their inn rejoins his train.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“His change of mien to all was manifest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All saw his heart was heavy; yet not one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid these, in any sort, the reason guessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor read the secret woe which caused his moan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All thought he had to Rome his steps addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Woe to the town, surnamed of horns, had gone.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-336" id="noteref-336" epub:type="noteref">336</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Love has caused the mischief all surmise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though none of them conjectures in what wise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“His brother weened he was in grief immersed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For his deserted wife: he, on his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For other reason, inly chafed and cursed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—That she was but too well accompanied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile, with swelling lips and forehead pursed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ground that melancholy stripling eyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faustus, who vainly would apply relief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill cheered him, witless what had caused his grief.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“He for his sore an evil salve had found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, where he should retire, encreased his woes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, with the mention of his wife, that wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflamed and opened, which he sought to close.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He rests not night nor day, in sorrow drowned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His appetite is gone, with his repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ne’er to return; and (whilom of such fame)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His lovely visage seems no more the same.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“His eye-balls seem deep-buried in his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His nose seems grown⁠—his cheeks are pined so sore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor even remains (his beauty so is fled)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enough to warrant what he was before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such fever burns him, of his sorrow bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He halts on Arbia’s and on Arno’s shore;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-337" id="noteref-337" epub:type="noteref">337</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if a charm is left, ’tis faded soon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And withered like a rose-bud plucked at noon.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Besides that Faustus sorrowed to descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him so bested; worse cause for sorrowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was to that courtier to appear to lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before Astolpho; he was pledged to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One that was fairest deemed in every eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who must appear the foulest to that king;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet he continued on his way to wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And brought him to Pavia in the end.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Not that forthwith he lets the youth be seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest him the king of little wit arraign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He first by his dispatches lets him ween,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thither he Jocundo brings with pain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saying, that of his beauteous air and mien</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some secret cause of grief had been the bane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accompanied by a distemper sore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that he seemed not what he was before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Glad was the monarch, of his coming taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As of a friend’s arrival he could be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since in the universal world was nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he so much desired as him to see:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor was the Lombard’s king displeased in ought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To mark his guest’s inferiority;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though, but for his misfortune, it was clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He his superior would have been or peer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Lodged by him in his palace, every day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every hour, the stranger youth he sees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Studious to honour him, and bids purvey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Store of provision for his better ease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While still his thoughts to his ill consort stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Jocundo languishes; nor pastimes please</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That melancholy man; nor music’s strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One jot diminishes his ceaseless pain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Above his chambers, on the upper floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nearest the roof, there was an ancient hall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, in solitary mood, (for sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pastime and company, the stripling gall,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He aye betakes himself; while evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sad thoughts some newer cause of grief recall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He here (who would believe the story?) found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A remedy unhoped, which made him sound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“At that hall’s farther end, more feebly lighted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For windows ever closed shut out the day)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where one wall with another ill united,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, through the chink, beheld a brighter ray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There laid his eye, and saw, what he had slighted</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As hard to credit, were it but hearsay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hears it not, but this himself descries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet hardly can believe his very eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“He of the Queen’s apartment here was sight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-338" id="noteref-338" epub:type="noteref">338</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her choicest and her priviest chamber, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was never introduced whatever wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save he most faithful was esteemed: he there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he was peeping, saw an uncouth fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A dwarf was wrestling with the royal fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such that champion’s skill, though under-grown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He in the strife his opposite had thrown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“As in a dream, Jocundo stood, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself, awhile of sober sense bereaved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, but when of the matter certified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sure it was no dream, his sight believed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—‘A scorned and crooked monster,’ (then he cried,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Is, as her conqueror, by a dame received,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wife of the comeliest, of the curtiest wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And greatest monarch; Oh! what appetite!’</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“And he the consort to whom he was wed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her he most used to blame, recalled to mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for the stripling taken to her bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To deem the dame less culpable inclined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less of herself than sex the fault he read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to one man could never be confined:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thought, if in one taint all women shared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least <em>his</em> had not with a monster paired.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“To the same place Jocundo made return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the same hour, upon the following day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, putting on the king the self-same scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again beheld that dwarf and dame at play:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so upon the next and following morn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For⁠—to conclude⁠—they made no holiday:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While she (what most Jocundo’s wonder moved)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pigmy for his little love reproved.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“One day, amid the rest, the youth surveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dame disordered and opprest with gloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having twice summoned, by her waiting-maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The favoured dwarf, who yet delayed to come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A third time by the lady sent, she said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—‘Engaged at play, Madonna, is the groom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, lest he lose a doit, his paltry stake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will that discourteous churl his game forsake.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“At such strange spectacle, the Roman knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cleared up his brow, his visage and his eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He jocund, as in name, became in sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And changed his tears for smiles: with altered guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He waxed ruddy, gay, and plump in plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seems a cherubim of Paradise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that such change with wonderment all see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brother and king, and royal family.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>“If from the youth Astolpho wished to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From whence this sudden light of comfort came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less Jocundo this desired to show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the king such injury proclaim:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But willed that like himself he should forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Revenge upon the author of that shame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence, that he might discern her guilt, yet spare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He made him on the <i>Agnus Dei</i> swear.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-339" id="noteref-339" epub:type="noteref">339</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>“He made him swear that he, for nothing said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or seen, which might to him displeasing be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Though he, in what he should discover, read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An outrage offered to his majesty,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would, now or ever, venge him on his head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moreover him he bound to secrecy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the ill doer ne’er, through deed or word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might guess his injured king that case had heard.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The monarch, who to every thing beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could better have given credit, freely swore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him the cause Jocundo signified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why he had many days lamenting sore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—‘Because he had his evil wife espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the embraces of a serjeant poor;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-340" id="noteref-340" epub:type="noteref">340</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vowed he should in fine have died of grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he for longer time had lacked relief.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘But that within his highness’ palace said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had witnessed what had much appeased his woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, if foul shame had fallen upon his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least he was not single;’ saying so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to that chink the Lombard monarch led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who spied the mannikin of hideous show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Che la giumenta altrui sotto si tiene;</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-341" id="noteref-341" epub:type="noteref">341</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Tocca di sproni, e fa giocar di schene.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“You may believe he shameless deemed that act,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without my swearing it; he, at the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seemed, would go distraught⁠—with fury racked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He against every wall his head would smite⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would cry aloud⁠—would break the solemn pact,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet kept parforce the promise he had plight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gulped his anger down and bitter scorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since on the holy water he had sworn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Then to Jocundo; ‘What remains to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To do in this misfortune, brother, speak;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since vengeance with more noted cruelty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou wilt not let me on the sinners wreak.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Jocundo answered) ‘Let these ingrates be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And try we if all women are as weak;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if the wives of others can be won</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To do what others by our own have done.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Both fair and youthful, measured by this scale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor easily our equals shall we find;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What woman but to us shall strike her sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If even to the ugly these are kind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least, if neither youth nor grace avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The money may, with which our bags are lined;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor will I that we homeward more return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere the chief spoils we from a thousand earn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Long absence, seeing with a distant part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Converse with different women, oft allay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As it would seem, the troubles of a heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereof Love’s angry passions make their prey.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king is pleased to hear the youth impart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This counsel, nor his journey will delay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence on their road, with but two squires beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He and the Roman knight together ride.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Disguised they go through France and Italy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They Flanders next and England scower, and where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A woman they of lovely visage spy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye find the dame complaint with their prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They upon some bestow what others buy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oft replaced their squandered treasures are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our travellers to the wives of many sued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by as many other dames were wooed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“By solid proof those comrades ascertain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><em>Here</em> tarrying for a month, and <em>there</em> for two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That their own wives are of no other vein</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than those of others, and as chast and true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After some season, wearied are the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With ever running after something new:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, without risk of death, thus evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The intruders ill could enter other’s door.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘⁠—’Twere best to find a girl whose natural bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And face to both of us should pleasing be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A girl, that us in common might content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor we in her find cause for jealousy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wherefore wouldst thou that I should lament</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than with other, to go halves with thee?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Exclaimed Astolpho) ‘well I know is none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all the female sex, content with one.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘One damsel that in nought shall us constrain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Then only, when disposed to please the fair⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will we in peace and pleasure entertain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor we, about her, have dispute or care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, deem I, she with reason could complain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if two fell to every other’s share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better than one might she keep faith with two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor haply we such frequent discord view.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Much seems the king’s proposal to content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Roman youth; and thus it is, the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To execute Astolpho’s project bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Journey by many a hill and many a plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And find at last, well fitting their intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The daughter of a publican of Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of presence and of manners framed to win;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose father at Valencia kept his inn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“As yet, upon the bloom of spring, the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was a fresh flower that scarce began to blow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her sire with many children was o’erlaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was to poverty a mortal foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence ’tis an easy matter to persuade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mine host his buxom daughter to forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let them, where they will the damsel bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that to treat her well the travellers swear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Pigliano la fanciulla, e piacer n’hanno</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-342" id="noteref-342" epub:type="noteref">342</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Hor l’uno, hor l’altro in caritade, e in pace,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Come à vicenda i mantici, che danno</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Hor l’uno or l’altro, fiato à la fornace.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Per veder tutta Spagna indi ne vanno;</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E passar poi nel regno di Siface,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They to Zattiva come upon the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That from Valencia they had bent their way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>“The travellers from their inn to street and square</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And places, public and divine, resort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, wheresoever they had made repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Themselves were so accustomed to disport,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The girl is with the valets left in care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who make the beds, and wearied hackneys sort:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While others in the hostel-kitchen dight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The meal against their lords’ return at night.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“As groom, a stripling in the hostel plied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in the other landlord’s house had been:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, from her childhood at the damsel’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had joyed her love: they, without change of mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On meeting, closely one another eyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since either apprehended to be seen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when alone⁠—now left together⁠—raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their eyelids and on one another gazed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The stripling asked her whitherward they sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the two which claimed her as his right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This, point by point, to him Flammetta read;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flammetta she, the Greek that boy was hight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘⁠—When I had hoped the time was coming,’ said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Greek⁠—‘that I should live with thee, my light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flammetta, thou, alas! art lost to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor know I if I more thy face shall see.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘I to the bitter dregs the cup must drain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of promised sweets; since thou art others’ prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas my design, having with mickle pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And labour sore, some money put away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which I had hoarded out of frequent gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From parting guests, and from my yearly pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek again Valencia, and demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thee from thy sire in lawful wedlock’s band.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“The damsel shrugs her shoulders, and complains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And⁠—‘that he is too late’⁠—is her reply.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Greek laments and sobs, and partly feigns:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘⁠—Wilt thou (he answered her) thus let me die?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let me, at least, exhale my amorous pains!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let me, but once, in thine embrace lie!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For every moment in thy presence spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere thou depart, will make me die content.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>“To him the damsel, full of pity, cries:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Believe, I covet this no less than thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But here, surrounded by so many eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is neither time nor opportunity.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘⁠—I feel assured’ (to her that youth replied)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Were I beloved by you, as you by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This very night you would find out a place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein to solace us some little space.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“She bade him come⁠—when she awhile had thought⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he believed that all asleep were laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how by him her chamber should be sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how he should return, at full, displayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cautious stripling did as he was taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, when he found all silent, thither made:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He pushed, till it gave way, the chamber-door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, upon tiptoes, softly paced the floor.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Pensa ella alquanto; e poi dice, che vegna,</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-343" id="noteref-343" epub:type="noteref">343</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Quando creder potrà ch’ogn’uno dorma;</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E pianamente come far convegna,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E de l’andare, e del tornar l’informa.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Il Greco, sì come ella le disegna,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Quando sente dormir tutta la torma,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Viene à l’uscio e lo spinge, e quel gli cede;</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Entra pian piano, e va à tenton col piede.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Fa lunghi i passi, e sempre in quel di dietro</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-344" id="noteref-344" epub:type="noteref">344</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Tutto si ferma, e l’altro par che muova,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">À guisa, che di dar tema nel vetro,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Non che’l terreno habbia à calcar, ma l’uova;</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E tien la mano inanzi simil metro,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Va brancolando in fin che’l letto trova;</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E di là, dove gli altri havean le piante,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Tacito si cacciò col capo inante.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Fra l’una e l’altra gamba di Fiammetta,</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-345" id="noteref-345" epub:type="noteref">345</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Che supina giacea, diritto venne.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E quando le fu à par, l’abbracciò stretta,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E sopra lei sin presso al dì si tenne.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Cavalcò forte, e non andò à staffetta,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Che mai bestia mutar non li convenne,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Che questa pare a lui che sì ben trotte,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Che scender non ne vuol per tutta notte.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Havea Giocondo, ed avea il Re sentito</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-346" id="noteref-346" epub:type="noteref">346</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Il calpestio, che sempre il letto scosse,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E l’uno e l’altro, d’uno error schernito</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">S’havea creduto che’l compagno fosse,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Poi c’hebbe il Greco il suo camin fornito,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Sì come era venuto, anco tornosse.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Saettò il sol da l’Orizzonte i raggi,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Sorse Fiammetta, e fece entrare i paggi.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Il Re disse al compagno motteggiando,</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-347" id="noteref-347" epub:type="noteref">347</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Frate, molto camin fatto aver dei.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E tempo è ben, che ti riposi, quando</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Stato à cavallo tutta notte sei.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Giocondo à lui rispose di rimando,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">S disse, tu di quel, ch’io à dire avrei.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">À te tocca posare; e pro ti faccia;</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Che tutta notte hai cavalcato à caccia.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Anch’io (suggiunse il Re) senza alcun fallo</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-348" id="noteref-348" epub:type="noteref">348</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Lasciato havria il mio can correre un tratto,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Ee mi havessi prestato un po il cavallo</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">tanto che 'l mio bisogno avessi fatto. —</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Giocondo replicò, Son tuo vasallo,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E poi far meco, e rompere ogni patto,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Sì, che non convenia tal cenni usare;</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Ben mi potevi dir, Lasciala stare.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Tanto replica l’un, tanto soggiunge</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-349" id="noteref-349" epub:type="noteref">349</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">L’altro, che sono à grave lite insieme.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Vengon da’ motti ad un parlar, che punge;</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Ch’ad amenduo l’esser beffato preme.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Chiaman Fiammetta, che non era lunge,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E de la fraude esser scoperta teme;</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Per fare in viso l’uno all'altro dire</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Quel, che negando ambi parean mentire.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Dimmi (le disse il Re con fiero sguardo)</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-350" id="noteref-350" epub:type="noteref">350</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E non temer di me, né di costui,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Chi tutta notte fu quel sì gagliardo,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Che ti godé, senza far parte altrui?</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Credendo l’un provar l’altro bugiardo</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">La risposta aspettavano ambedui.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Fiammetta a’ piedi lor si gittò, incerta</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Di viver più, vedendosi scoperta.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Domandò lor perdono, che d’amore,</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-351" id="noteref-351" epub:type="noteref">351</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Ch’à un giovinetto havea portato, spinta,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E da pietà d’un tormentato core,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Che molto havea per lei patito, vinta,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Caduta era la notte in quello errore,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E seguitò, senza dir cosa finta,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Come tra lor con speme si condusse,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Ch’ambi credesser, che’l compagno fusse.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Gazing on one another, with surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch and Jocundo are confused;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor even to have heard a case surmise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of two, that ever thus had been abused:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then laughed so, that they sate with winking eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And open mouth, and lungs which breath refused;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, wearied with the mirth her tale had bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell backwards, both, exhausted on the bed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“When they had laughed so loud a laugh, the dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood in their eyes, and each with aching breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remained, the pair exclaimed: ‘What shall we do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In order not to be a woman’s jest?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since we, with all our heed, between us two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could not preserve the one by us possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A husband, furnished with more eyes than hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perforce must be betrayed with all his care.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘A thousand, beauteous all, have we found kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor one of those so many has stood fast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If tried, all women we by proof should find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like these; but be the experiment our last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then we may deem our own not worse inclined</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than are the wives of others, and as chaste:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if like others we our own discern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I hold it best that we to them return.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“When they have come to this resolve, they, through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flammetta, call the youth into their bower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the girl her leman, in the view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of many, gift, and add a fitting dower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They mount, and to the east their way pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accustomed westward hitherto to scower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To their deserted wives again repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor of their after-deeds take farther care.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Here paused mine host; to whom on every side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His audience had with careful heed attended.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont listened, nor a word replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until the landlord’s story was suspended.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then⁠—“Fully I believe,” that paynim cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“The tale of women’s frauds would ne’er be ended;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor could that man in any volume note</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thousandth part, who would their treasons quote.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Of sounder judgement, ’mid that company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There was an elder, one more wise and bold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That undefended so the sex to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was inly wroth, and could no longer hold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the relater of that history</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He turned; and, “Many things we have been told”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Exclaimed that ancient) “wherein truth is none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of such matters is thy fable one.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Him I believe not, that told this truth to you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though in all else he gospel-truths exprest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As less by his experience, than untrue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conceit respecting women prepossest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The malice which he bears to one or two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes him unjustly hate and blame the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But you shall hear him, if his wrath o’erblow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet greater praise than blame on these bestow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And he a larger field for speaking well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will find, than blaming womankind withal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of a hundred worthy fame may tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For one whose evil deeds for censure call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He should exalt the many that excel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Culled from the multitude, not rail at all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If otherwise your friend Valerio said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He was by wrath, and not by reason, led.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Ditemi un poco, è di voi forse alcuno,</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-352" id="noteref-352" epub:type="noteref">352</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">C’habbia servato à la sua moglie fede?</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Che nieghi andar, quando gli sia oportuno,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">À l’altrui donna, e darle ancor mercede?</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Credete in tutto’l mondo trovarne uno?</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Chi’l dice, mente; e folle è ben chi’l crede.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Trovatene vo’ alcuna, che vi chiami?</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Non parlo de le publiche, ed infami.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Conoscete alcun voi, che non lasciasse</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-353" id="noteref-353" epub:type="noteref">353</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">La moglie sola, ancor che fosse bella,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Per seguire altra donna, se sperasse,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">In breve, e facilmente ottener quella?</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Che farebbe egli, quando lo pregasse,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Ò desse premio à lui donna, ò donzella?</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Credo per compiacere or queste, hor quelle,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Che tutti lasciaremmovi la pelle.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Quelle, che i lor mariti hanno lasciati,</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-354" id="noteref-354" epub:type="noteref">354</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Le più volte cagione havuta n’hanno.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Del suo di casa li veggon svogliati,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E che fuor, de l’altrui bramosi vanno.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Dovriano amar, volendo esser’ amati,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E tor con la misura ch’à lor danno.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Io farei (se à me stesse il darla, e torre)</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Tal legge, c’huom non vi potrebbe opporre.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">Saria la legge, ch’ogni donna colta</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-355" id="noteref-355" epub:type="noteref">355</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">In adulterio, fosse messa à morte;</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Se provar non potesse, ch’una volta</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Havesse adulterato il suo consorte.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Se provar lo potesse, andrebbe asciolta,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Né temeria il marito, né la Corte.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Cristo ha lasciato ne i precetti suoi;</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Non far altrui quel, che patir non vuoi.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="it">La incontinenza è quanto mal si puote</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-356" id="noteref-356" epub:type="noteref">356</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Imputar lor, non già à tutto lo stuolo;</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Ma in questo chi ha di noi più brutte note?</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Che continente non si trova un solo.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">E molto più n’ha d’arrossir le gote;</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Quando bestemmia, ladroneccio, dolo,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Usura, ed omicidio, e se v’e peggio,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">
					<i xml:lang="it">Raro, se non dagli huomini, far veggio.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>So reasoning, that just elder and sincere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With ready instances, supports his creed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Showing there many women are who ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sinned against chastity, in word or deed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But him with impious visage and severe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim scared, ill pleased the truth to read.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that, through fear, he further speech forbore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But changed not therefore aught his former lore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Having stopt further question in this wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim monarch from the table rose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then lays him on his bed, till from the skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dusky shades depart, and morning glows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But spends a larger part of night in sighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At his liege-lady’s sin, than in repose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont thence departs at dawn of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved by water to pursue his way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>For with such care for his good horse’s plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As is becoming a good cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The courser fair and good, made his in spite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of young Rogero and Circassia’s peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing he, for two days, that horse’s might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had taxed too hardly in his long career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—As well he for his ease embarked the steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to pursue his way with better speed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>He straight makes launch the vessel from the marge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bids put forth the oars from either side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor big nor deeply laden, she, at large,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descends the Saone, transported by the tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Care never quits him, though the shifting barge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king ascend, or nimble horse bestride:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This he encounters aye on prow or poop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bears behind him on his courser’s croup;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rather within his head or heart always</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Care sits; whence every comfort is o’erthrown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No remedy the wretched man surveys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that his enemies are in the town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From others hope is none; since they who raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This fearful war against him, are his own:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vext by that cruel one, aye night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he might hope to find his natural stay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Rodomont navigates the day and night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ensuing, aye by heavy thoughts opprest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can he ever banish the despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suffered from King and Lady, from his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The self-same grief sate heavy on his sprite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aboard the bark, as when his steed he prest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such fire was not by water to be drowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor he his nature changed by changing ground.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-357" id="noteref-357" epub:type="noteref">357</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>As the sick man who with a fever grows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, weak and weary, shifts his place in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether he right or left himself bestows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hopes in turning some relief to gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Finds neither on <em>this</em> side nor <em>that</em> repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But everywhere encounters equal pain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pagan monarch so found small relief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By land or water, for his secret grief.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rodomont brooked no more aboard to stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But bade them land him, and by Lyons hied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Vienne and Valence next took his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the rich bridge in Avignon descried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For these and more, which ’twixt the river lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Celtiberian hills upon that side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Theirs, from the day they conquered the champaigne)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Obeyed the kings of Afric and of Spain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>To pass to Afric straight, the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kept to the right, towards Acquamorta’s shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lighted on a stream and hamlet, dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Ceres and to Bacchus, which that Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Found quitted by the peasants, in their fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As often by the soldier harried sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beach upon one side broad ocean laved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the other yellow harvests waved.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Here, newly built upon a hillock’s crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A little church the Saracen espied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abandoned by its priesthood, like the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For war was flaming upon every side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont of this place himself possest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, from its site, as well as lying wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fields, from whence he tidings loathed to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So pleased him, he for it renounced Argier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>He changed his scheme of seeking Afric’s land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So this fair spot seemed fit for his behoof!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here housed carriages, and steed, and band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together with himself, beneath one roof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At few leagues’ distance, did Montpelier stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other wealthy towns, not far aloof.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The village was upon a river’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that its every need might be supplied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>Here standing, full of thought, upon a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Such was his common wont) the paynim spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Advancing by a narrow path, which lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through a green meadow, from the adverse side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lovely damsel, that upon her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was by a bearded monk accompanied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these behind them led a lusty steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who bore a burden, trapt with sable weed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Who that attendant monk and damsel were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what that burden, will to you be clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remembering Isabella is the fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charged with the corse of her Zerbino dear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I left her, where from Provence, in the care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that good sire, she bowned herself to steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom persuaded, had the lady given</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The remnant of her virtuous life to heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Although in her pale face and troubled guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sorrow of that dame is manifest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although two fountains are her streaming eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sobs aye issue from her burning breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more beside of suffering testifies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With what a load of grief she is opprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet, in her faded cheek such beauties meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love and the Graces there might fix their seat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As soon as he of Sarza saw appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauteous dame, he laid the thought aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of hatred to that gentle race and dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom alone the world is glorified;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And best by Isabel the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believed his former love would be supplied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one love by another be effaced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As bolt by bolt in timber is displaced.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Her with the kindest mien and mildest tone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he could fashion, met the Sarzan knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom the dame her every thought made known;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said, when she was questioned of her plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“She would with holy works⁠—this world forgone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seek favour in her Heavenly Father’s sight.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loud laughed that godless paynim at the thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who every faith and worship held at nought;</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>And said, “that she from reason wandered wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And termed her project sudden and unsound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor deemed her less to blame than those who hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through greediness, their treasure under ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And keep it from the use of all beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though hence no profit to themselves redound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rightly were prisoned lion, snake, and bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But ill whate’er is innocent and fair.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>The monk, that to this talk has lent an ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prompt with advice that mournful dame to stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lest she quit her course, prepared to steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His bark, like practised pilot, on her way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A sumptuous table, rich in spiritual cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had speedily bestirred him to array;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, born with evil taste, that paynim rude</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No sooner tasted, than he loathed, the food.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>And having interrupted him in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor having power to make him stint his lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That paynim, stirred to fury, broke the rein</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of patience, and assailed the preacher hoar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But haply wearisome might seem the strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I upon this theme dilated more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So here I close, nor words will idly spend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Admonished by that ancient’s evil end.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
