<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-14" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Two squadrons lack of those which muster under</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">King Agramant, by single Roland slain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hence furious Mandricardo, full of wonder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And envy, seeks the count by hill and plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next joys himself with Doralice; such plunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aided by heaven, his valiant arms obtain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rinaldo comes, with the angel-guide before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Paris, now assaulted by the Moor.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>In many a fierce assault and conflict dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twixt Spain and Afric and their Gallic foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Countless had been the slain, whose bodies fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ravening eagle, wolf, and greedy crow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But though the Franks had worse in warfare sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forced all the champaigne country to forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This had the paynims purchased at the cost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of more good princes and bold barons lost.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>So bloody was the price of victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Small ground was left them triumphs to prepare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if, unconquered Duke Alphonso,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-175" id="noteref-175" epub:type="noteref">175</a> we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May modern things with ancient deeds compare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The battle, whose illustrious palm may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well worthily assigned to you to wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At whose remembrance sad Ravenna trembles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And aye shall weep her loss, this field resembles.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>When the Calesians and the Picards yielding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And troops of Normandy and Aquitaine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You, with your valiant arms their squadrons shielding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stormed the almost victorious flags of Spain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those bold youths their trenchant weapons wielding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through parted squadrons, followed in your train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who on that day deserved you should accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For honoured gifts, the gilded spur and sword.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-176" id="noteref-176" epub:type="noteref">176</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>You, with such glorious hearts, who were not slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To follow, nor far off, the gorgeous oak</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seized, and shook down the golden acorns so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so the red and yellow truncheon broke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That we to you our festive laurels owe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the fair lily, rescued from its stroke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another wreath may round your temples bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that Fabricius you preserved to Rome.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-177" id="noteref-177" epub:type="noteref">177</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>Rome’s mighty column, by your valiant hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Taken and kept entire,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-178" id="noteref-178" epub:type="noteref">178</a> more praise has shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On you, than if the predatory band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had routed by your single valour bled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all who flocked to fat Ravenna’s land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or masterless, without a banner fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Arragon, Castile, or of Navarre;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When vain was lance or cannon’s thundering car.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>This dear-bought victory brought more relief</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than joy, by its event too much outweighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The loss of that French captain and our chief,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-179" id="noteref-179" epub:type="noteref">179</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom dead we on the fatal field surveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And swallowed in one storm, for further grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many glorious princes, who, arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For safeguard of their own, or neighbouring lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had poured through frozen Alps their friendly bands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>Our present safety, and life held in fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We see assured us by this victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That saved us from the wintry tempest drear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which would have whelmed us from Jove’s angry sky.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-180" id="noteref-180" epub:type="noteref">180</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But ill can we rejoice, while yet the tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is standing in full many a widow’s eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who weeping and attired in sable, vents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout all grieving France, her loud laments.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>’Tis meet King Lewis should find new supplies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of chiefs by whom his troops may be arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for the lilies’ honour shall chastise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hands which so rapaciously have preyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who brethren, black and white, in shameful wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have outraged, sister, mother, wife, and maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cast on earth Christ’s sacrament divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the intent to thieve his silver shrine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>Hadst thou not made resistance to thy foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better, Ravenna, had it been for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thou been warned by Brescia’s fate, than so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thine should Faenza warn and Rimini.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O Lewis, bid good old Trivulzio go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With thine, and to thy bands example be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tell what ills such license still has bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaping our ample Italy with dead.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-181" id="noteref-181" epub:type="noteref">181</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>As the illustrious King of France has need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of captains to supply his leaders lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So the two kings who Spain and Afric lead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To give new order to the double host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolve their bands should muster on the mead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From winter lodgings moved and various post;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they may furnish, as their wants demand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A guide and government to every band.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>Marsilius first, and after Agramant,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-182" id="noteref-182" epub:type="noteref">182</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Passing it troop by troop their army scan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Catalonians, who their captain vaunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Doriphoebus, muster in the van;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next, without their monarch Fulvirant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erst killed by good Rinaldo, comes the clan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of bold Navarre; whose guideless band to steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The King of Spain appoints Sir Isolier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>With Balugantes Leon’s race comes on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Algarbi governed by Grandonio wheel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The brother of Marsilius, Falsiron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brings up with him the power of Less Castile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They follow Madarasso’s gonfalon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who have left Malaga and fair Seville,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twixt fruitful Cordova and Cadiz-bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where through green banks the Betis winds its way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Stordilane, Tessira, and Baricond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After each other, next their forces stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This in Grenada, that in Lisbon crowned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Majorca was obedient to the third.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Larbino <em>had</em> Lisbon ruled, whose golden round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was at his death on Tessira conferred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His kinsman he: Gallicia came in guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Serpentine, who Mericold supplied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>They of Toledo and of Calatrave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who erst with Sinnagon’s broad banner spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marched, and the multitude who drink and lave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their limbs in chrystal Guadiana’s bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came thither, under Matalista brave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath Bianzardin, their common head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astorga, Salamanca, Placenza,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Avila, Zamorra, and Palenza.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>The household-troops which guard Marsilius’ state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Saragossa’s men, Ferrau commands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in this force, well-sheathed in mail and plate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bold Malgarine and Balinverno stands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Morgant and Malzarise, whom common fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had both condemned to dwell in foreign lands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, when dethroned, had to Marsilius’ court</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(There hospitably harboured) made resort.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Follicon, Kind Marsilius’ bastard, hies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With valiant Doricont; amid this horde,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bavartes, Analard, and Argalise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Archidantes, the Saguntine lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here, Malagur, in ready cunning wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Ammirant and Langhiran the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unsheath, and march; of whom I shall endite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When it is time, their prowess to recite.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>When so had filed the warlike host of Spain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fair review before King Agramant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared King Oran with his martial train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who might almost a giant’s stature vaunt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next they who weep their Martasino, slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the avenging sword of Bradamant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King of the Garamantes, and lament</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That woman triumphs in their monarch spent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Marmonda’s men next past the royal Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who left Argosto dead on Gascon meads;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this unguided band, like that before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well as the fourth troop, a captain needs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although King Agramant has little store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of chiefs, he feigns a choice, and thinks; next speeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Buraldo, Ormida, and Arganio tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where needing, the unordered troops to guide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>He gives Arganio charge of Libicane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who wept the sable Dudrinasso dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brunello guides the men of Tingitane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With cloudy countenance and drooping head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who since he in the wooded mountain-chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Nigh where Atlantes dwelt), to her he led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair Bradamant, had lost the virtuous ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had lived in the displeasure of his king;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>And but that Ferrau’s brother Isolier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who fastened to a stem had found him there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made to King Agramant the truth appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from the gallows-tree had swung in air:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already fastened was the noose, and near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The caitiff’s fate, when at the many’s prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king bade loose him; but reprieving, swore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For his first fault to hang, offending more.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Thus, not without a cause, Brunello pined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And showed a mournful face, and hung his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next Farurantes: to whose care consigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Maurina’s valiant horse and footmen tread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The new-made king Libanio comes behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom are Constatina’s people led:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since Agramant the crown and staff of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Once Pinador’s, had given to him to hold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Hesperia’s people come with Soridan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Dorilon the men of Setta ride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Nasamonians troop with Pulian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Agricaltes is Ammonia’s guide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Malabupherso rules o’er Fezzan’s clan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Finaduro leads the band supplied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the Canary Islands and Morocco:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Balastro fills the place of king Tardocco.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Next Mulga and Arzilla’s legions two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first beneath their ancient captains wend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The second troop without a leader, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are given to Corineus, the sovereign’s friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So (late Tanphirion’s) Almonsilla’s crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a new monarch in Caïchus bend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Goetulia is bestowed on Rhimedont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Cosca comes in charge of Balinfront.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Ruled by Clarindo, Bolga’s people go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who fills the valiant Mirabaldo’s post:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him Baliverso, whom I’d have you know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the worst ribald in that ample host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Succeeded next. I think not, ’mid that show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bannered camp a firmer troop could boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than that which followed in Sobrino’s care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Saracen than him more wise and ware.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Gualciotto dead, Bellamarina’s crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(His vassals) serve, the sovereign of Algiers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Rodomont, of Sarza; that anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brought up a band of foot and cavaliers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom, when the cloudy sun his rays withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the Centaur and the Goat,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-183" id="noteref-183" epub:type="noteref">183</a> his spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There to recruit, was sent to the Afric shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Agramant, returned three days before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>There was no Saracen of bolder strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all the chiefs who Moorish squadrons led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Paris-town (nor is the terror vain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More of the puissant warrior stands in dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than of King Agramant and all the train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he, or the renowned Marsilius head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And amid all that mighty muster, more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than others, hatred to our faith he bore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Prusion is the Alvaracchia’s king: below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Dardinello’s flag Zumara’s power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is ranged. I wot not, I, if owl or crow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or other bird ill-omened, which from tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or tree croaks future evil, did foreshow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To one or to the other, that the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was fixed in heaven, when on the following day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Either should perish in this deadly fray.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Noritia’s men and Tremisene’s alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were wanting to complete the paynim host;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But in the martial muster sign was none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor tale, nor tiding of the squadrons lost;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wondering Agramant alike unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What kept the slothful warriors from their post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When of King Tremisene’s a squire was brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before him, who at large the mischief taught;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>—Who taught how Manilardo was laid low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alzirdo, and many others, on the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Sir,” said the bearer of the news, “the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who slew our troop, would all thy camp have slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thine assembled host had been more slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than me, who, as it was, escaped with pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This man slays horse and foot, as in the cote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wolf makes easy waste of sheep and goat.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Where the bold Africans their standards plant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A warrior had arrived some days before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor was there in the west, or whole Levant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A knight, with heart or prowess gifted more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him much grace was done by Agramant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As successor of Agrican, who wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The crown of Tartary, a warrior wight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The son the famous Mandricardo hight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Renowned he was for many a glorious quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Achieved, and through the world his fame was blown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But him had glorified above the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worth in the Syrian fairy’s castle shown:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-184" id="noteref-184" epub:type="noteref">184</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where mail, which cased the Trojan Hector’s breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand years before, he made his own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And finished that adventure, strange and fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A story which breeds terror but to tell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>When the squire told his news amid that show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of troops, was present Agrican’s bold son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who raised his daring face, resolved to go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And find the warrior who the deed had done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the design he hatched, forebore to show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As making small account of any one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or fearing lest, should he reveal his thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The quest by other champion might be sought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He of the squire demanded what the vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bearings, which the valiant stranger wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who answered, “that he went without a crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sable shield and sable surcoat bore.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—And, sir, ’twas true; for so was Roland drest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The old device renounced he had before:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For as he mourned within, so he without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The symbols of his grief would bear about.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Marsilius had to Mandricardo sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As gift, a courser of a chestnut stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose legs and mane were sable; he was bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between a Friesland mare and nag of Spain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Mandricardo, armed from foot to head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leapt on the steed and galloped o’er the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And swore upon the camp to turn his back</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he should find the champion clad in black.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>The king encounters many of the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom good Orlando’s arm had put to flight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And some a son, and some a brother rue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in the rout had perished in their sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the coward’s cheek of pallid hue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is <em>yet</em> pourtrayed the sad and craven sprite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—<em>Yet</em>, through the fear endured, they far and nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pallid, and silent, and insensate fly.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor he long was had rode, ere he descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A passing-cruel spectacle and sore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But which the wonderous feats well testified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That were recounted Agramant before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now on <em>this</em> hand, now <em>that</em>, the dead he eyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Measured their wounds, and turned their bodies o’er;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moved by strange envy of the knight whose hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had strown the champaign with the slaughtered band.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>As wolf or mastiff-dog, who comes the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the remains of slaughtered bullock lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And finds but horn and bones, where rich repast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had fed the ravening hound and vulture nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Glares vainly on the scull, unsmacked; so passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The barbarous Tartar king those bodies by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grudged, lamenting, like the hungry beast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To have come too late for such a sumptuous feast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>That day, and half the next, in search he strayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of him who wore the sable vest and shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When lo! he saw a mead, o’ertopt with shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where a deep river wound about the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With narrow space between the turns it made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where’er from side to side the water wheeled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even such a spot as this with circling waves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Below Otricoli the Tyber laves.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Where this deep stream was fordable, he scanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A crowd of cavaliers that armour bore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these the paynim questioned, “Who had manned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such a troop, and to what end, the shore?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him replied the captain of the band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moved by his lordly air, and arms he wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Glittering with gold and jewels⁠—costly gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which showed him an illustrious cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>“In charge” (he said) “we of the daughter go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of him our king, who fills Granada’s throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Espoused by Rodomont of Sarza, though</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fame the tidings are as yet unknown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And we, departing when the sun is low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the cicala hushed, which now alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is heard, shall bring her where her father keeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ the Spanish camp; meanwhile the lady sleeps.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>He who for scorn had daffed the world aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Designs to see at once, how able were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those horsemen to defend the royal bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Committed by their sovereign to their care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“The maid, by what I hear, is fair:” (he cried)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Fain would I now be certified, how fair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then me to her, or her to me convey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I must quickly wend another way.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Thou needs art raving mad,” replied in few</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The chief⁠—nor more. But with his lance in rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Tartar monarch at the speaker flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the levelled spear transfixed his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the point pierced the yielding corslet through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lifeless he, perforce, the champaign prest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The son of Agrican his lance regained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who weaponless without the spear remained.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Now sword nor club the warlike Tartar bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since, when the Trojan Hector’s plate and chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He gained, because the faulchion lacked, he swore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(To this obliged), nor swore the king in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That save he won the blade Orlando wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would no other grasp⁠—that Durindane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Held in high value by Almontes bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Roland bears, and Hector bore of old.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Great is the Tartar monarch’s daring, those</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At such a disadvantage to assay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He pricks, with levelled lance, among his foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shouting, in fury⁠—“Who shall bar my way?”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Round and about him suddenly they close;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These draw the faulchion, and those others lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The spear in rest: a multitude he slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before his lance was broke upon the crew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>When this he saw was broke, the truncheon sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet entire, he took, both hands between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with so many bodies strewed the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That direr havoc never yet was seen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as with that jaw-bone, by hazard found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Hebrew Samson slew the Philistines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crushed helm and shield; and often side by side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slain by the truncheon, horse and rider died.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>In running to their death the wretches vie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor cease because their comrades perish near:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet bitterer in such a mode to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than death itself, does to the troop appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They grudge to forfeit precious life, and lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crushed by the fragment of a broken spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And think foul scorn beneath the pounding stake</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strangely to die the death of frog or snake.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>But after they at their expense had read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it was ill to die in any way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And near two thirds were now already dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest began to fly in disarray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if with what was his the vanquished fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cruel paynim, cheated of his prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill bore that any, from the murderous strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that scared rabble, should escape with life.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As in the well-dried fen or stubble-land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Short time the stalk endures, or stridulous reed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the flames, which careful rustic’s hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scatters when Boreas blows the fires to feed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time they take, and by the north-wind fanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crackle and snap, and through the furrow speed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No otherwise, with little profit, those</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Mandricardo’s kindled wrath oppose.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>When afterwards he marks the entrance free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left ill-secured, and without sentinel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, following prints (which had been recently</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marked on the mead), proceeds, amid the swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of loud laments, Granada’s dame to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she as beauteous were as what they tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He wound his way ’mid corpses, where the wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Winding from side to side, a passage gave:</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>And in the middle of the mead surveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doralice (such the gentle lady’s name),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-185" id="noteref-185" epub:type="noteref">185</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, at the root of an old ash-tree laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bemoaned her: fast her lamentations came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tears, like plenteous vein of water, strayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the beauteous bosom of the dame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, (so it from her lovely face appeared,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For others mourned, while for herself she feared.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>Her fear increased when she approaching spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him foul with blood, and marked his felon cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And piercing shrieks the very sky divide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raised by herself and followers, in their fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For over and above the troop who guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fair infanta, squire and cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came ancient men and matrons in her train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And maids, the fairest of Granada’s reign.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>When that fair face by him of Tartary</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is seen, which has no paragon in Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where amid tears (in laughter what were she?)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is twisted Love’s inextricable chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He knows not if in heaven or earth he be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor from his victory reaps other gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than yielding up himself a thrall to her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(He knows not why) who was his prisoner.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet not so far his courtesy he strained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he would lose his labour’s fruit, although</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The royal damsel showed, who sorely plained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such grief as women in despair can show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, who the hope within him entertained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To turn to sovereign joy her present woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would wholly bear her off; whom having placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On a white jennet, he his way retraced.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>He dames, maids, ancient men, and others, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had from Granada with the damsel fared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kindly dismissed, their journey to pursue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saying, “My care suffices; I of guard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of guide, of handmaid will the office do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To serve her in her every need prepared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Farewell!” and thus unable to withstand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wrong, with tears and sighs withdrew the band,</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>Saying, “How woe-begone will be her sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he the miserable case shall hear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What grief will be the bridegroom’s! what his ire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How dread the vengeance of that cavalier!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When so the lady’s needs such help require,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! and why is not the champion near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To save the illustrious blood of Stordilane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere the thief bears her farther hence, from stain?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The Tartar, joying in the prize possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he by chance and valour won and wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To find the warrior of the sable vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seemed not to have the haste he had before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stopp’d and loitered, where he whilom prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cast about and studied evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To find some fitting shelter; with desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In quiet to exhale such amorous fire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Doralice he consoled this while, whose eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cheek were wetted with the frequent tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many matters feigned and flattering lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“How, known by fame, he long had held her dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how his country and glad realm, whose size</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shamed others, praised for grandeur far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He quitted, not for sight of France or Spain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to behold that cheek of lovely grain.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“If a man merits love by loving, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yours by my love deserve; if it is won</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By birth⁠—who boasts a genealogy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like me, the puissant Agricano’s son?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By riches⁠—who with me in wealth can vie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in dominion yield to God alone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By courage⁠—I to-day (I ween) have proved</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I for courage merit to be loved.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>These words, and many others on his part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love frames and dictates to the Tartar knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which sweetly tend to cheer the afflicted heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the unhappy maid, disturbed with fright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By these fear first was laid, and next the smart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sheathed of that woe, which had nigh pierced her sprite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with more patience thence the maid began</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hear, and her new lover’s reasons scan.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>Next much more affable, with courteous lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seasoning her answers to his suit, replies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor looking at the king, sometimes forbore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fix upon his face her pitying eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim thence, whom Love had smote before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not hopeful now, but certain, of his prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deemed that the lovely damsel would not still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As late, be found rebellious to his will.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Riding in her glad company a-field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which so rejoiced his soul, so satisfied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And being near the time, when to their bield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Warned by the chilly night, all creatures hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing the sun now low and half concealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior ’gan in greater hurry ride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he heard reed-pipe and whistle sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next saw farm and cabin smoking round.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Pastoral lodgings were the dwellings near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less formed for show, than for conveniency;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the young damsel and the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The herdsman welcomed with such courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That both were pleasured by his kindly cheer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For not alone dwells Hospitality</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In court and city; but ofttimes we find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In loft and cottage men of gentle kind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>What afterwards was done at close of day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between the damsel and the Tartar lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will not take upon myself to say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So leave to each, at pleasure, to award.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But as they rose the following morn more gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It would appear they were of fair accord:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the swain who them such honour showed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her thanks at parting Doralice bestowed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Thence from one place to the other wandering, they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Find themselves by a river, as they go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to the sea in silence winds its way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ill could be pronounced to stand or flow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So clear and limpid, that the cheerful day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With nought to intercept it, pierced below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon its bank, beneath a cooling shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They found two warriors and a damsel laid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Now lofty Fancy, which one course to run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Permits not, calls me hence in sudden wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thither I return, where paynims stun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair France with hosile din and angry cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About the tent, wherein Troyano’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They holy empire in his wrath defies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And boastful Rodomont, with vengeful doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gives Paris to the flames, and levels Rome.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Tidings had reached the Moorish sovereign’s ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the English had already passed the sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he bade Garbo’s aged king appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marsilius, and his heads of chivalry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who all advised the monarch to prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the assault of Paris. “They may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assured they in the storm will never thrive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless ’tis made before the aids arrive.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Innumerable ladders for the scale</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had been collected upon every hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And plank and beam, and hurdle’s twisted mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For different uses, at the king’s command;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bridge and boat; and, what might more avail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than all the rest, a first and second band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the assault (so bids the monarch) form;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who will himself go forth with them that storm.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The emperor, on the vigil of the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of battle, within Paris, everywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By priest and friar of orders black and gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And white, bade celebrate mass-rite and prayer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those who had confessed, a fair array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the Stygian demons rescued were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Communicated in such fashions, all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if they were the ensuing day to fall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>At the high church, he, girt with paladine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And preachers of the word, and barons brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With much devotion at those acts divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assisted, and a fair example gave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there with folded hands and face supine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaimed, “O Lord! although my sins be grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Permit not, that, in this their utmost need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy people suffer for their king’s misdeed!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“And if that they should suffer is thy will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that they should due penance undergo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least delay thy purpose to fulfil!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that thine enemies deal not the blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, when ’tis given him in his wrath to kill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Us who are deemed thy friends, the paynim foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou art without power to save, will cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because thou lett’st thy faithful people die:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“And, for one faithless found, against thy sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hundred shall throughout the world rebel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that false Babel’s law will have its way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus thy blessed faith put down and quell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Defend thy suffering people, who are they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That purged thy tomb from heathen hounds and fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many times and oft, by foes offended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy holy church and vicars have defended.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“That our deserts unfitting are to place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ the scale against our mighty debt, I know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor pardon can we hope, if we retrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our sinful lives; but if thou shouldst bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In aid, the gift of they redeeming grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The account is quit and balanced, that we owe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can we of thy succour, Lord, despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While we in mind thy saving mercy bear.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>So spake the holy emperor aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In humbleness of heart and deep contrition;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And added other prayers withal, and vowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What fitted his great needs and high condition.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now was his supplication disallowed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For his good genius hears the king’s petition,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Best of the seraphs he; who spreads his wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the Saviour’s feet this offering brings.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Infinite other prayers as well preferred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were, by like couriers, to the Godhead’s ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So borne; which when the blessed spirits heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They all together gazed, with pitying cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On their eternal, loving Lord, and, stirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With one desire, besought that he would hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The just petition, to his ears conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of this his Christian people, seeking aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>And the ineffable Goodness, who in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was never sought by faithful heart, an eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full of compassion, raised; and from the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waved Michael, and to the arch-angel: “Hie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek the Christian host that crost the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lately furled their sails in Picardy:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These so conduct to Paris, that their tramp</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And noise be heard not in the hostile camp.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Find Silence first, and bid him, on my part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On this emprize attend thee, at thy side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since he for such a quest, with happiest art</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will know what is most fitting to provide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next, where she sojourns, instantly impart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Discord my command, that she, supplied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With steel and tinder, ’mid the paynims go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fire and flame in their encampment blow;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And throughout those among them, who are said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be the mightiest, spread such strife, that they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together may contend, and that some dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remain, some hurt, some taken in the fray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And some to leave the camp, by wrath, be led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that they yield their sovereign little stay.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nothing the blessed winged-one replies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But swoops descending from the starry skies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Where’er the angel Michael turns his wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The clouds are scattered and the sky turns bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About his person forms a golden ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As we see summer lightning gleam at night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while the courier of the heavenly king</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thinks, on his way, where he may best alight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the intent to find that foe to speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom he first his high behest would teach.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Upon the thought the posting angel brooded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he, for whom he sought was used to dwell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who after thinking much, at last concluded</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him he should find in church or convent-cell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where social speech is in such mode excluded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That <b>Silence</b>, where the cloistered brethren swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their anthems, where they sleep, and where they sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At meat; and everywhere in fine is writ.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Weening that he shall find him here, he plies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With greater speed his plumes of gilded scale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deems as well that Peace, here guested, lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Charity and Quiet, without fail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But finds he is deceived in his surmise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as he has past the cloister’s pale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here Silence is not; nor (’tis said) is found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Longer, except in writing, on this ground.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor here he Love, nor here he Peace surveys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Piety, Quiet, or Humility.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here dwelt they once; but ’twas in ancient days;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chased hence by Avarice, Anger, Gluttony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pride, Envy, Sloth, and Cruelty. In amaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The angel mused upon such novelty:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He narrowly the hideous squadron eyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Discord too amid the rest espied;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Even her, to whom the eternal Sire as well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having found Silence, bade him to repair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had believed he to Avernus’ cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where she was harboured with the damned, must fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now discerned her in this other hell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Who would believe it?) amid mass and prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strange Michael thought to see her there enshrined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he believed he must go far to find.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Her by her party-coloured vest he knew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unequal strips and many formed the gown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, opening with her walk, or wind that blew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now showed, now hid her; for they were unsown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her hair appeared to be at strife; in hue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like silver and like gold, and black and brown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Part in a tress, in riband part comprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some on her shoulders flowed, some on her breast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Examinations, summons, and a store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of writs and letters of attorney, she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hearings, in her hands and bosom bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And consultation, and authority:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weapons, from which the substance of the poor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can never safe in walled city be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before, behind her, and about her, wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Attorney, notary, and advocate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Her Michael calls to him, and give command</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That she among the strongest paynims go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And find occasion whence amid the band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Warfare and memorable scathe may grow.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He next from her of Silence makes demand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who of his motions easily might know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As one who from one land to the other hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kindling and scattering fire on either side.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“I recollect not ever to have viewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him anywhere,” quoth Discord in reply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“But oft have heard him mentioned, and for shrewd</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Greatly commended by the general cry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Fraud, who makes one of this multitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who has sometimes kept him company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I think, can furnish news of him to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (pointing with her finger) <em>that is she</em>.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>With pleasing mien, grave walk, and decent vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fraud rolled her eye-balls humbly in her head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such benign and modest speech possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She might a Gabriel seem who <i>Ave</i> said.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-186" id="noteref-186" epub:type="noteref">186</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foul was she and deformed, in all the rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with a mantle long and widely spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Concealed her hideous parts; and evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the stole a poisoned dagger wore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Of her the good archangel made demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What way in search of Silence to pursue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who said; “He with the Virtues once was scanned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor dwelt elsewhere; aye guested by the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Benedict, or blest Elias’ band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When abbeys and when convent-cells were new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whilom in the schools long time did pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sage Archytas and Pythagorus.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“But those philosophers and saints of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extinguished, who had been his former stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the good habits he had used before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He passed to evil ones; began to stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Changing his life, at night with lovers, bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thieves company, and sinned in every way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He oftentimes consorts with Treason; further,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I even have beheld him leagued with Murther.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>“With coiners him you oftentimes may see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Harbour in some obscure and close repair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So oft he changes home and company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To light on him would be a fortune rare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet have I hope to point him out to thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If to Sleep’s house thou wilt at midnight fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him wilt thou surely find; for to repose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At night he ever to that harbour goes.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>Though Fraud was alway wont to deal in lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So like the simple truth appears her say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The angel yields the tale belief; and flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forth from the monastery without delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tempers his speed, and schemes withal in wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To finish at the appointed time his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That at the house of Sleep (the mansion blind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full well he knew) this Silence he may find.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>In blest Arabia lies a pleasant vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Removed from village and from city’s reach.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By two fair hills o’ershadowed is the dale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And full of ancient fir and sturdy beech.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither the circling sun without avail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conveys the cheerful daylight: for no breach</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rays can make through boughs spread thickly round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And it is here a cave runs under ground.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Beneath the shadow of this forest deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the rock there runs a grotto wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here widely wandering, ivy-suckers creep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About the cavern’s entrance multiplied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Harboured within this grot lies heavy Sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ease, corpulent and gross, upon <em>this</em> side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon <em>that</em>, Sloth, on earth has made her seat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who cannot go, and hardly keeps her feet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Mindless Oblivion at the gate is found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who lets none enter, and agnizes none;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor message hears or bears, and from that ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without distinction chases every one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While Silence plays the scout and walks his round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equipt with shoes of felt and mantle brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And motions from a distance all who meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him on his circuit, from the dim retreat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>The angel him approaches quietly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, “ ’Tis God’s bidding” (whispers in his ear)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That thou Rinaldo and his company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brought in his sovereign’s aid, to Paris steer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that thou do the deed so silently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That not a Saracen their cry shall hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that their army come upon the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere he from Fame of their arrival know.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Silence to him no otherwise replied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than signing with his head that he obeyed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(And took his post behind the heavenly guide)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both at one flight to Picardy conveyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The angel moved those bands of valour tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And short to them a tedious distance made:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he to Paris safe transports; while none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is conscious that a miracle is done.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Silence the advancing troop kept skirting round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In front, and flank, and rear of the array;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above the band he spread a mist profound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And everywhere beside ’twas lightsome day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor through the impeding fog the shrilling sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of horn was heard, without, or trumpet’s bray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He next the hostile paynims went to find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with I know not what made deaf and blind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>While with such haste his band Rinaldo led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That him an angel well might seem to guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in such silence moved, that nought was said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or heard of this upon the paynim side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Agramant his infantry had spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout fair Paris’ suburbs, and beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The foss, and underneath the walls; that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make upon the place his worst assay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>He who the Moorish monarch’s force would tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Charlemagne this day will have to meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In wooded Apennine might count as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The trees upon its back, or waves that beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(What time the troubled waters highest swell)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the Mauritanian Atlas’ feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or watch at midnight with how many eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The furtive works of lovers Heaven espies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>The larum-bells, loud-sounding through the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stricken with frequent blows, the town affray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the crowded temples every where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Movement of lips and hands upraised to pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are seen: if treasure seemed to God so fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to our foolish thoughts, upon this day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The holy consistory had bid mould</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their every statue upon earth in gold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>Lamenting may be heard the aged just,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that they were reserved for such a woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calling those happy that in sacred dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were buried many and many a year ago.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the bold youths who, valiant and robust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Small thought upon the approaching ills bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scorning their elders’ counsel, here and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hurrying, in fury, to the walls repair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>Here might you paladin and baron ken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King, duke, and marquis, count and chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And soldier, foreigner or citizen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ready for honour and for Christ to die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, eager to assail the Saracen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On Charlemagne to lower the bridges cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He witnesses with joy their martial heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to permit their sally deems not meet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And them he ordered in convenient post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The advance of the barbarians to impede:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For <em>this</em> would ill suffice a numerous host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To <em>that</em> he was content that few should speed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some worked at the machines, some wild-fire tost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All ranged according to the separate need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charles, never in one place, with restless care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Provides defence and succour every where.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Paris is seated on a spacious plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ the midst⁠—the heart of France, more justly say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A stream flows into it, and forth again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first, the passing waters, as they stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An island form, and so secure the main</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And better part, dividing on their way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other two (three separate quarters note),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within the river girds, without the moat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>The town, whose walls for miles in circuit run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might well have been attacked from many a side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet, for he would assail it but on one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor willingly his scattered troops divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Westward beyond the stream Troyano’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Retired, from thence the assailing bands to guide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that, he neither city had nor plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind, but what was his, as far as Spain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Where’er the walls of Paris wound about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Large ammunition had king Charles purveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strengthening with dyke each quarter held in doubt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had within trench, drain, and casemate made:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where the river entered and went out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had thickest chains across the channel laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But most of all, his prudent cares appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where there is greatest cause for present fear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVII-->
			<p>
				<span>With eyes of Argus, Pepin’s valiant son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Agramant was bent to storm foresaw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every thing forestalled, ere yet begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the bold followers of Mahound’s law.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Isolier, Grandonio, Falsiron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Serpentin, Balugantes, and Ferrau,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what beside he out of Spain had led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marsilius was in arms, their valiant head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>With old Sobrino, on the left of Seine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pulian and Dardinel d’Almontes meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Oran’s giant king, to swell the train:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Six cubits is the prince, from head to feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But why move I my pen with greater pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than these men move their arms? for in his heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Rodomont exclaims, blaspheming sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can contain his furious spirit more.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIX-->
			<p>
				<span>As swarming to assail the pastoral bowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sound of stridulous wing, through summer sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or relics of a feast, their luscious dole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Repair the ready numbers of the fly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As starlings to the vineyard’s crimsoning pole</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the ripe clusters charged⁠—heaven’s concave high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Filling, as they advanced, with noise and shout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fast hurried to the storm the Moorish rout.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CX-->
			<p>
				<span>Upon their walls the Christians in array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With lance, sword, axe, and wild-fire tost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The assaulted city guard without dismay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And little reck the proud barbarian’s boast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor when death snatches this or that away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Does any one in fear refuse his post.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the fosse below the paynim foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return, amid a storm of strokes and blows.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor in this was is iron plied alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But mighty masses and whole bulwarks fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And top of tower, huge piece of bastion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with much toil disrupted, solid wall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While streams of boiling water pouring down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Insufferably the advancing paynims gall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An ill-resisted rain, which, in despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of helmet, makes its way, and blinds the sight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXII-->
			<p>
				<span>And this than iron spear offended more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then how much more the mist of lime-dust fine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then how the emptied vessel, burning sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With nitre, sulphur, pitch, and turpentine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor idle lie the fiery hoops in store,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-187" id="noteref-187" epub:type="noteref">187</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, wreathed about with flaming tresses, shine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These at the foemen scaled, upon all hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Form cruel garlands for the paynim bands,</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile, up to the walls the second crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fierce Sarza’s king was driven, accompanied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By bold Orlando and Buraldo, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Garamantes and Marmonda guide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clarindo and Loridano; nor from view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seems, will Setta’s valiant monarch hide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Morocco’s king and he of Cosco go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With these, that men their martial worth may know.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>With crimson Rodomont his banner stains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the vermeil field a lion shows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, bitted by a maid, to curb and reins</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His savage mouth disdains not to unclose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself in the submissive lion feigns</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The haughty Rodomont, and would suppose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In her who curbs him with the bit and string,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doralice, daughter to Grenada’s king;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Whom Mandricardo took, as I before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Related, and from whom, and in what wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even she it was, whom Sarza’s monarch more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loved than his realm⁠—beyond his very eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And valour showed for her and courteous lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not knowing yet she was another’s prize.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he had⁠—then⁠—then, first⁠—the story known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even what he did that day, he would have done.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>At once the foes a thousand ladders rear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the wall by the assailants shored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two mannered each round; the second, in the rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Urged on by the first; the third the second gored.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One mounts the wall through valour, one through fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all attempt perforce the dangerous ford;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For cruel Rodomont, of Argier, slays</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or smites the wretched laggard who delays.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>’Tis thus, ’mid fire and ruin, all assay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To mount the wall; but others to assure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Themselves, some safer passage seek, where they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will have least pain and peril to endure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont only scorns by any way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wend, except by what is least secure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in that desperate case, where others made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their offerings, cursed the god to whom they prayed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He in a cuirass, hard and strong, was drest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A dragon-skin it was with scaly quilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which erst secured the manly back and breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his bold ancestor, that Babel built;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who hoped the rule of heaven from God to wrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him would from his golden dome have split.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perfect, and for this end alone, were made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Helmet and shield as well as trenchant blade.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor Rodomont to Nimrod yields in might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proud and untamed; and who would not forbear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To scale the lofty firmament till night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could he in this wide world descry the stair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He stood not, he, to mark the bulwark’s plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor if the fosse of certain bottom were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He past, ran⁠—rather flew across the moat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plunging in filth and water to his throat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Dripping and foul with water and with weeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid fire and stone, and arbalests, and bows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On drives the chief; as through the marshy reeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wild-swine of our own Mallea<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-188" id="noteref-188" epub:type="noteref">188</a> goes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who makes large day-light wheresoe’er he speeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Parting the sedge with breast and tusk and nose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim, safe in buckler lifted high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scorns not the wall alone, but braves the sky.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rodomont has no sooner gained the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than on the wooden bartizan he stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within the city walls, a bridge that bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Roomy and large) king Charles’s Christian bands.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-189" id="noteref-189" epub:type="noteref">189</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here many a scull is riven, here men take more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than monkish tonsure at the warrior’s hands:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heads fly and arms; and to the ditch a flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Runs streaming from the wall of crimson blood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>He drops the shield; and with two-handed sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wielding his sword, duke Arnulph he offends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who came from whence, into the briny bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The water of the rapid Rhine descends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No better than the sulphur keeps away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The advancing flame, the wretch his life defends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He his last shudder gives, and tumbles dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cleft downwards, a full palm from neck and head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>At one back-stroke sir Spineloccio true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anselmo, Prando, and Oldrado fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The narrow place and thickly-swarming crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make the wide-circling blow so fully tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first half Flemings were, the residue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are Normans, who the list of slaughter swell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orghetto of Maganza, he from brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To breast divides, and thence to paunch below.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Down from the wall Andropono and Moschine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He cast into the ditch: a priest the first;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The second, but a worshipper of wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drained, at a draught, whole runlets in his thirst;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye wonted simple water to decline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like viper’s blood or venom: now immersed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this, he perishes amid that slaughter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, what breeds most affliction, dies by water.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Lewis the Provencal is cleft in two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arnold of Thoulouse through the breast before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hubert of Tours, sir Dionysius, Hugh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Claud, pour forth their ghosts in reeking gore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Odo, Ambaldo, Satallon ensue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Walter next; of Paris are the four⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With others, that by me unmentioned fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who cannot tell the name and land of all.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The crowd, by Rodomont of Sarza led,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-190" id="noteref-190" epub:type="noteref">190</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ladders lift, and many places scale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here the Parisians make no further head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who find their first defense of small avail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full well they know that danger more to dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within awaits the foemen who assail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because between the wall and second mound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fosse descends, wide, horrid, and profound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Besides, that ours, with those upon the height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">War from below, like valiant men and stout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">New files succeed to those who fall in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, on the interior summit, stand the rout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who gall with lances, and a whistling flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of darts, the mighty multitude without;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many of whom, I ween, that post would shun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If it were not for royal Ulien’s son.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-191" id="noteref-191" epub:type="noteref">191</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But he still heartened some, and chid the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And forced them forward to their sore alarm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One paynim’s head he cleft, and other’s breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who turned about to fly; and of the swarm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some shoved and pushed and to the encounter prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Close-grappled by the collar, hair, or arm:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And downwards from the wall such numbers threw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ditch was all to narrow for the crew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>While so the foes descend, or rather fling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Themselves into the perilous profound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thence by many ladders try to spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the summit of the second mound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Rodomont, as if he had a wing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his every member, from the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upraised his weight, and vaulted clean across,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loaded with all his arms, the yawning fosse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>The moat of thirty feet, not less, he cleared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As dexterously as leaps the greyhound fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor at his lighting louder noise was heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than if he had worn felt beneath his feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He now of <em>this</em>, now <em>that</em>, the mantle sheared;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As though of pewter, not of iron beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or rather of soft rind their arms had been:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So matchless was his force and sword so keen!</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>This while, not idle, those of ours had laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Snares in the inner moat, a well-charged mine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where broom and thick fascines, all over paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With swarthy pitch, in plenty intertwine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though they from bank to bank that hollow line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Filling the bottom well-nigh to the brink;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And countless vessels the defenders sink.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Charged with salt-petre, oil, or sulphur pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One and the other, or with such like gear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While ours, intent the paynims that assail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The town, should pay their daring folly dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Who from the ditch on different parts would scale</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The inner bulwark’s platform) when they hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The appointed signal which their comrades raise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Set, at fit points, the wildfire in a blaze.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>For that the moat was full from side to side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The scattered flames united into one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mounted to such height, they well-nigh dried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The watery bosom of the moon; a dun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dismal cloud above extending wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dimmed every glimpse of light, and hid the sun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fearful crash, with a continued sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like a long peal of thunder, shook the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>A horrid concert, a rude harmony</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of deep lament, and yell and shriek, which came</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From those poor wretches in extremity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perishing through their furious leader’s blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was heard, as in strange concord, to agree</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the fierce crackling of the murderous flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more of this, no more!⁠—Here, sir, I close</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My canto, hoarse, and needing short repose.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
