<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Rogero flies; Astolpho with the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To their true shape Melissa does restore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rinaldo levies knights and squadrons, pressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In aid of Charles assaulted by the Moor:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Angelica, by ruffians found at rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is offered to a monster on the shore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Orlando, warned in visions of his ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departs from Paris sore against his will.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>How many enchantresses among us! oh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How many enchanters are there, though unknown!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for their love make man or woman glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Changing them into figures not their own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this by help of spirits from below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor observation of the stars is done:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But these on hearts with fraud and falsehood plot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Binding them with indissoluble knot.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Who with Angelica’s, or rather who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were fortified with Reason’s ring, would see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each countenance, exposed to open view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unchanged by art or by hypocrisy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This now seems fair and good, whose borrowed hue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Removed, would haply foul and evil be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well was it for Rogero that he wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The virtuous ring which served the truth to explore!</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero, still dissembling, as I said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed, to the gate on Rabican did ride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Found the guard unprepared, not let his blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid that crowd, hang idle at his side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He passed the bridge, and broke the palisade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some slain, some maimed; then t’wards the forest hied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But on that road small space had measured yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he a servant of the fairy met.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>He on his fist a ravening falcon bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he made fly for pastime every day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now on the champaign, now upon the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of neighbouring pool, which teemed with certain prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rode a hack which simple housings wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His faithful dog, companion of his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, marking well the haste with which he hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conjectures truly what Rogero flies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>Towards him came the knave, with semblance haught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Demanding whither in such haste he sped:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him the good Rogero answers naught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hence assured more clearly that he fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within himself to stop the warrior thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus, with his left arm extended, said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“What, if I suddenly thy purpose balk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thou find no defence against this hawk?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>Then flies his bird, who works so well his wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rabican cannot distance him in flight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The falconer from his back to ground did spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And freed him from the bit which held him tight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who seemed an arrow parted from the string,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And terrible to foe, with kick and bite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While with such haste behind the servant came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sped as moved by wind, or rather flame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor will the falconer’s dog appear more slow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But hunts Rogero’s courser, as in chace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of timid hare the pard is wont to go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not to stand fast the warrior deems disgrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And turns towards the swiftly-footed foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he sees wield a riding-wand, place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of other arms, to make his dog obey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero scorns his faulchion to display.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The servant made at him, and smote him sore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dog his left foot worried; while untied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From rein, the lightened horse three times and more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lashed from the croup, nor missed his better side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hawk, oft wheeling, with her talons tore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stripling, and his horse so terrified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The courser, by the whizzing sound dismayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Little the guiding hand or spur obeyed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>Constrained at length, his sword Rogero drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To clear the rabble, who his course delay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the animals’ or villain’s view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did now its point, and now its edge display.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with more hinderance and vexatious crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swarm here and there, and wholly block the way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that dishonour will ensue and loss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero sees, if him they longer cross.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>He knew each little that he longer stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would bring the fay and followers on the trail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already drums were beat, and trumpets brayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And larum-bells rang loud in every vale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An act too foul it seemed to use his blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On dog, and knave unfenced with arms or mail:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A better and shorter way it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The buckler, old Atlantes’ work, to bare.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>He raised the crimson cloth in which he wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wondrous shield, enclosed for many a day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its beams, as proved a thousand times before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Work as they wont, when on the sight they play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Senseless the falconer tumbles on the moor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drop dog and hackney; drop the pinions gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which poised in air the bird no longer keep:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then glad Rogero leaves a prey to sleep.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>In the mean time, Alcina, who had heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How he had forced the gate, and, in the press,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slaughtered a mighty number of her guard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remained nigh dead, o’erwhelmed with her distress;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She tore her vesture, and her visage marred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cursed her want of wit and wariness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then made forthwith her meiny sound to arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And round herself arrayed her martial swarms.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Divided next, one squadron by the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero took, she sent; the bands were two:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She at the port embarked the next array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And straight to sea dispatched the warlike crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this good squadron went the desperate fay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And darked by loosened sails the billows grew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For so desire upon her bosom preyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of troops she left her city unpurveyed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Without a guard she left her palace there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to Melissa, prompt her time to seize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To loose her vassals that in misery were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afforded all convenience and full ease;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—To range, at leisure, through the palace fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so examine all her witcheries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To raze the seal, burn images, and loose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or cancel hag-knot, rhomb, or magic noose.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>Thence, through the fields, fast hurrying from that dome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The former lovers changed, a mighty train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some into rock or tree, to fountain some,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or beast, she made assume their shapes again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these, when they anew are free to roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Follow Rogero’s footsteps to the reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Logistilla’s sage; and from that bourn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Scythia, Persia, Greece, and Ind return.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>They to their several homes dispatched, repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bound by a debt which never can be paid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The English duke, above the rest her care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of these, was first in human form arrayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For much his kindred and the courteous prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of good Rogero with Melissa weighed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside his prayers, the ring Rogero gave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That him she by its aid might better save.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Thus by Rogero’s suit the enchantress won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his first shape transformed the youthful peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But good Melissa deemed that nought was done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save she restored his armour, and that spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of gold, which whensoe’er at tilt he run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the first touch unseated cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Once Argalia’s, next Astolpho’s lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And source of mighty fame to both in France.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The sage Melissa found this spear of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which now Alcina’s magic palace graced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other armour of the warrior bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of which he was in that ill dome uncased.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She climbed the courser of the wizard old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the croup, at ease, Astolpho placed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus, an hour before Rogero came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Repaired to Logistilla, knight and dame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Meantime, through rugged rocks, and shagged with thorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero wends, to seek the sober fay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From cliff to cliff, from path to path forlorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A rugged, lone, inhospitable way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he, with labour huge oppressed and worn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Issued at noon upon a beach, that lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twixt sea and mountain, open to the south,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deserted, barren, bare, and parched with drouth.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>The sunbeams on the neighbouring mountain beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And glare, reflected from the glowing mass</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So fiercely, sand and air both boil with heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In mode that might have more than melted glass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The birds are silent in their dim retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor any note is heard in wood or grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save the bough perched Cicala’s wearying cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which deafens hill and dale, and sea and sky.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The heat and thirst and labour which he bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By that drear sandy way beside the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Along the unhabited and sunny shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were to Rogero grievous company:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bur for I may not still pursue this lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor should you busied with one matter be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero I abandon in this heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Scotland; to pursue Rinaldo’s beat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>By king, by daughter, and by all degrees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Sir Rinaldo was large welcome paid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next the warrior, at his better ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The occasion of his embassy displayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he from thence and England, subsidies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of men was seeking, for his monarch’s aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Charles’s name; and added, in his care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The justest reasons to support his prayer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The king made answer, that ‘without delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Taxed to the utmost of his powers and might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His means at Charlemagne’s disposal lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the honour of the empire and the right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that, within few days, he in array</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such horsemen, as he had in arms, would dight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, save that he was now waxed old, would lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The expedition he was prayed to speed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>‘Nor like consideration would appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthy to stop him, but that he possessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A son, and for such charge that cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Measured by wit and force, was worthiest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though not within the kingdom was the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It was his hope (as he assured his guest)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would, while yet preparing was the band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return, and find it mustered to his hand.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>So sent through all his realm, with expedition,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His treasures, to levy men and steeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ships prepared, and warlike ammunition,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And money, stores and victual for their needs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meantime the good Rinaldo on his mission,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving the courteous king, to England speeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He brought him on his way to Berwick’s town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was observed to weep when he was gone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The wind sat in the poop; Rinaldo good</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embarked and bade farewell to all; the sheet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still loosening to the breeze, the skipper stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till where Thames’ waters, waxing bitter, meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Salt ocean: wafted thence by tide of flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through a sure channel to fair London’s seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Safely the mariners their course explore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Making their way, with aid of sail and oar.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The Emperor Charles, and he, King Otho grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was with Charles, by siege in Paris pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A broad commission to Rinaldo brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With letters to the Prince of Wales addressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And countersigns had given, dispatched to crave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What foot and horse were by the land possessed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The whole to be to Calais’ port conveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it to France and Charles might furnish aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The prince I speak of, who on Otho’s throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sate in his stead, the vacant helm to guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such honor did to Aymon’s valiant son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He not with such his king had gratified.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next, all to good Rinaldo’s wish, was done:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since for his martial bands on every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Britain, or the isles which round her lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To assemble near the sea he fixed a day.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>But here, sir, it behoves me shift my ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like him that makes the sprightly viol ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who often changes chord and varies sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now a graver strikes, now sharper string:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus I:⁠—who did to good Rinaldo bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My tale, Angelica remembering;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Late left, where saved from him by hasty flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She had encountered with an anchorite.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Awhile I will pursue her story: I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Told how the maid of him with earnest care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enquired, how she towards the shore might fly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who of the loathed Rinaldo has such fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She dreads, unless she pass the sea, to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As insecure in Europe, far or near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But she was by the hermit kept in play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he pleasure took with her to stay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>His heart with love of that rare beauty glowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to his frozen marrow pierced the heat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, after, when he saw that she bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Small care on him, and thought but of retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His sluggish courser stung with many a goad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with no better speed he plied his feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill was his walk, and worse his trot; nor spur</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could that dull beast to quicker motion stir:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>And for the flying maid was far before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he would soon have ceased to track her steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the dark cave recurred the hermit hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And conjured up of fiends a grisly breed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One he selected out of many more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And first informed the demon of his need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then in the palfrey bade him play his part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with the lady bore away his heart:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And as sagacious dog on mountain tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before, accustomed fox and hare to chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he behold the quarry choose one side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other takes, and seems to slight the trace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But at the turn arriving, is espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already tearing what he crossed to face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So her the hermit by a different road</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will meet, wherever she her palfrey goad.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>What was the friar’s design I well surmise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And you shall know; but in another page.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica now slow, now faster, flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nought fearing this: while conjured by the sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The demon covered in the courser lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As fire sometimes will hide its smothered rage:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then blazes with devouring flame and heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unquenchable, and scarce allows retreat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>After the flying maid had shaped her course</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the great sea which laves the Gascon shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still keeping to the rippling waves her horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where best the moistened sand the palfrey bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, plunged into the brine, the fiend perforce</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dragged, till he swam amid the watery roar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor what to do the timid damsel knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save that she closer to her saddle grew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>She cannot, howsoe’er the rein she ply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Govern the horse, who swims the surge to meet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her raiment she collects and holds it high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, not to wet them, gathers up her feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her tresses, which the breeze still wantonly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assaults, dishevelled on her shoulders beat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The louder winds are hushed, perchance in duty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Intent, like ocean, on such sovereign beauty.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Landward in vain her eyes the damsel bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Directs, which water face and breast with tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ever sees, decreasing to her sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beach she left, which less and less appears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The courser, who was swimming to the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After a mighty sweep, the lady bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To shore, where rock and cavern shag the brink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As night upon the land begins to sink.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When in that desert, which but to descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bred fear in the beholder, stood the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone, as Phoebus, plunged in ocean, sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And nether earth had left obscured in shade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She paused in guise, which in uncertainty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might leave whoever had the form surveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she were real woman, or some mock</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resemblance, coloured in the living rock.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>She, fixed and stupid in her wretchedness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood on the shifting sand, with ruffled hair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her hands were joined, her lips were motionless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her languid eyes upturned, as in despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accusing Him on high, that to distress</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whelm her, all the fates united were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astound she stood awhile; when grief found vent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through eyes and tongue, in tears and in lament.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>“Fortune what more remains, that thou on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shouldst not now satiate thy revengeful thirst?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What more (she said) can I bestow on thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than, what thou seekest not, this life accurst?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou wast in haste to snatch me from the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where I had ended its sad days, immersed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because to torture me with further ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before I die, is yet thy cruel will.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>“But what worse torment yet remains in store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond, I am unable to descry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By thee from my fair throne, which nevermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I hope to repossess, compelled to fly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, what is worse, my honour lost deplore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if I sinned not in effect, yet I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give matter by my wanderings to be stung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For wantonness of every carping tongue.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>“What other good is left to woman, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has lost her honour, in this earthly ball?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What profits it that, whether false or true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am deemed beauteous, and am young withal?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No thanks to heaven for such a gift are due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence on my head does every mischief fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this my brother Argalia died;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom small help enchanted arms supplied:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“For this the Tartar king, Sir Agrican,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Subdued my sire, who Galaphron was hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of Catay in India was great khan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis hence I am reduced to such a plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That wandering evermore, I cannot scan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At morn, where I shall lay my head at night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thou hast ravished what thou couldst, wealth, friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And honour; say what more thy wrath intends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“If death by drowning in the foaming sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was not enough thy wrath to satiate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Send, if thou wilt, some beast to swallow me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that he keep me not in pain! Thy hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cannot devise a torment, so it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My death, but I shall thank thee for my fate!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus, with loud sobs, the weeping lady cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When she beheld the hermit at her side.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>From the extremest height the hermit hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that high rock above her, had surveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica, arrived upon the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the cliff, afflicted and dismayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to that place had come six days before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him by path untrod had fiend conveyed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he approached her, feigning such a call</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As e’er Hilarion might have had, or Paul.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>When him, yet unagnized, she saw appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady took some comfort, and laid by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Emboldened by degrees, her former fear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though still her visage was of death-like dye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Misericord! father,” when the friar was near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(She said), “for brought to evil pass am I.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And told, still broke by sobs, in doleful tone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The story, to her hearer not unknown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>To comfort her, some reasons full of grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sage and devout the approaching hermit cites:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, now his hand upon her moistened face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In speaking, now upon her bosom lights:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As her, securer, next he would embrace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, kindling into pretty scorn, she smites</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With one hand on his breast, and backward throws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then flushed with honest red, all over glows.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>A pocket at the ancient’s side was dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he a cruise of virtuous liquor wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at those puissant eyes, whence flashed the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the most radiant torch Love ever bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threw from the flask a little drop, of might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make her sleep: upon the sandy shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already the recumbent damsel lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The greedy elder’s unresisting prey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>UNTRANSLATED</span>
			</p>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>UNTRANSLATED</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">UNTRANSLATED</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hopeless, at length upon the beach he lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the maid, exhausted, falls asleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When to torment him new misfortunes rise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fortune does seldom any measure keep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unused to cut her cruel pastime short,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she with mortal man is pleased to sport.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>It here behoves me, from the path I pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To turn awhile, ere I this case relate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the great northern sea, towards the west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Green Ireland past, an isle is situate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ebuda is its name, whose shores infest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Its people wasted through the Godhead’s hate)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hideous orc, and Proteus’ other herd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him against that race in vengeance stirred.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>Old stories, speak they falsely or aright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tell how a puissant king this country swayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had a daughter fair, so passing bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lovely, ’twas no wonder if the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When on the beach she stood in Proteus’ sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left him to burn amid the waves: surveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One day alone, upon that shore in-isled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her he compressed, and quitted great with child.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>This was sore torment to the sire, severe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And impious more than all mankind; nor he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such is the force of wrath, was moved to spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The maid, for reason or for piety.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, though he saw her pregnant, would forbear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To execute his sentence suddenly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But bade together with the mother kill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere born, his grandchild, who had done no ill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Sea-Proteus to his flocks’ wide charge preferred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Neptune, of all ocean’s rule possessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflamed with ire, his lady’s torment heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, against law and usage, to molest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The land (no sluggard in his anger) stirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His monsters, orc and sea-calf, with the rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who waste not only herds, but human haunts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Farm-house and town, with their inhabitants:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>And girding them on every side, the rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will often siege to walled cities lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where in long weariness and fearful doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The townsmen keep their watch by night and day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fields they have abandoned all about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for a remedy, their last assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the oracle, demanding counsel, fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to the suppliant’s prayer made this reply:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>‘That it behoved them find a damsel, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A form as beauteous as that other wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be to Proteus offered up, in lieu</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the fair lady, slain upon the shore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, if he deems her an atonement due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will keep the damsel, not disturb them more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If not, another they must still present,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so, till they the deity content.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And this it was the cruel usage bred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That of the damsels held most fair of face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Proteus every day should one be led.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till one should in the Godhead’s sight find grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first and all those others slain, who fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All a devouring orc, that kept his place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside the port, what time into the main</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The remnant of the herd retired again.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Were the old tale of Proteus’ false or true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For this, in sooth, I know not who can read)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such a clause was kept by that foul crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The savage, ancient statute, which decreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That woman’s flesh the ravening monster, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this came every day to land, should feed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though to be woman is a crying ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In every place, ’tis here a greater still.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>O wretched maids! whom ’mid that barbarous rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill-fortune on that wretched shore has tost!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for the stranger damsel prowl about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of her to make an impious holocaust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that the more they slaughter from without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They less the number of their own exhaust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But since not always wind and waves convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like plunder, upon every strand they prey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>With frigate and with galley wont to roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other sort of barks they range the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as a solace to their martyrdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From far, or from their isle’s vicinity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bear women off; with open rapine some,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These bought by gold, and those by flattery:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, plundered from the different lands they scower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crowd with their captives dungeon-cell and tower.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Keeping that region close aboard, to explore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The island’s lonely bank, a gallery creeps;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, amid stubs upon the grassy shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica, unhappy damsel, sleeps.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wood and water there the sailor’s moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the bark, for this, a party leaps;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there that matchless flower of earthly charms</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discovers in the holy father’s arms.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Oh! prize too dear, oh! too illustrious prey!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To glut so barbarous and so base a foe!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh! cruel Fortune! who believed thy sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was of such passing power in things below?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou shouldst make a hideous monster’s prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauty, for which Agrican did glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brought with half Scythia’s people from the gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Caucasus, in Ind, to find their fates.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The beauty, by Circassian Sacripant</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Preferred before his honour and his crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauty which made Roland, Brava’s vaunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sully his wholesome judgment and renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauty which had moved the wide Levant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And awed, and turned its kingdom upside down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now has not (thus deserted and unheard)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One to assist it even with a word.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Oppressed with heavy sleep upon the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lovely virgin, ere awake, they chain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her, the enchanter friar the pirates bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On board their ship, a sad, afflicted train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This done, they hoisted up their sail once more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the bark made the fatal isle again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, till the lot shall of their prey dispose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her prisoned in a castle they enclose.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>But such her matchless beauty’s power, the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was able that fierce crew to mollify,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who many days her cruel death delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Preserved until their last necessity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And while they damsels from without purveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spared such angelic beauty: finally,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel to the monstrous orc they bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The people all behind her sorrowing.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Who shall relate the anguish, the lament</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And outcry which against the welkin knock?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I marvel that the sea-shore was not rent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When she was placed upon the rugged block,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, chained and void of help, the punishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of loathsome death awaits her on the rock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This will not I, so sorrow moves me, say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which makes me turn my rhymes another way;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>To find a verse of less lugubrious strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till I my wearied spirit shall restore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For not the squalid snake of mottled stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor wild and whelpless tiger, angered more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor what of venomous, on burning plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Creeps ’twixt the Red and the Atlantic shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could see the grisly sight, and choose but moan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel bound upon the naked stone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Oh! if this chance to her Orlando, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was gone to Paris-town to seek the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had been reported! or those other two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Duped by a post, dispatched from Stygian shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They would have tracked her heavenly footsteps through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand deaths, to bear the damsel aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But had the warriors of her peril known.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So far removed, for what would that have done?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>This while round Paris-walls the leaguer lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of famed Troyano’s son’s besieging band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reduced to such extremity one day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it nigh fell into the foeman’s hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, but that vows had virtue to allay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wrath of Heaven, whose waters drenched the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That day had perished by the Moorish lance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The holy empire and great name of France.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>To the just plaint of aged Charlemagne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The great Creator turned his eyes, and stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The conflagration with a sudden rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which haply human art had not allayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wise whosoever seeketh, not in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His help, than whose there is no better aid!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well the religious king, to whom ’twas given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knew that the saving succour was from Heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>All night long counsel of his weary bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vexed with a ceaseless care, Orlando sought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now here, now there, the restless fancy sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now turned, now seized, but never held the thought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As when, from sun or nightly planet shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clear water has the quivering radiance caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flashes through the spacious mansion fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With reaching leap, right, left, and low, and high.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>To memory now returned his lady gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She rather ne’er was banished from his breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fanned the secret fire, which through the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Now kindled into flame) had seemed at rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in his escort even from Catay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or farthest Ind, had journeyed to the west;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There lost: Of whom he had discerned no token</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since Charles’s power near Bordeaux-town was broken.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>This in Orlando moved great grief, and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lay thinking on his folly past in vain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“My heart,” he said, “oh! how unworthily</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I bore myself! and out, alas! what pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(When night and day I might have dwelt with thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since this thou didst not in thy grace disdain.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To have let them place thee in old Namus’ hand!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Witless a wrong so crying to withstand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Might I not have excused myself?⁠—The king</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had not perchance gainsaid my better right⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of if he had gainsaid my reasoning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would have taken thee in my despite?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why not have armed, and rather let them wring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My heart out of my breast? But not the might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Charles or all his host, had they been tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could have availed to tear thee from my side.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Oh! had he placed her but in strong repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guarded in some good fort, or Paris-town!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Since he would trust her to Duke Namus’ care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he should lose her in this way, alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sorts with my wish. — Who would have kept the fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like me, that would for her to death have gone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have kept her better than my heart or sight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who should and could, yet did not what I might.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Without me, my sweet life, beshrew me, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Art thou bestowed, so beautiful and young!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As some lost lamb, what time the daylight fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shuts in, remains the wildering woods among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And goes about lamenting here and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping to warn the shepherd with her tongue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till the wolf hear from far the mournful strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the sad shepherd weep for her in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“My hope, where are thou, where? In doleful wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dost thou, perchance, yet rove thy lonely round?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Art thou, indeed, to ravening wolf a prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without thy faithful Roland’s succour found?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And is the flower, which, with the deities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me, in mid heaven had placed, which, not to wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So reverent was my love) thy feelings chaste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I kept untouched, alas! now plucked and waste?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“If this fair flower be plucked, oh, misery! oh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Despair! what more is left me but to die?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Almighty God, with every other woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than this, thy wretched suppliant try.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If this be true, these hands the fatal blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall deal, and doom me to eternity.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mixing his plaint with bitter tears and sighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So to himself the grieved Orlando cries.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Already every where, with due repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Creatures restored their weary spirits; laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These upon stones and upon feathers those,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or greensward, in the beech or myrtle’s shade:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But scarcely did thine eyes, Orlando close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So on thy mind tormenting fancies preyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would the vexing thoughts which bred annoy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let thee in peace that fleeting sleep enjoy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>To good Orlando it appeared as he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid odorous flowers, upon a grassy bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were gazing on that beauteous ivory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Love’s own hand had tinged with native red;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those two stars of pure transparency,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With which he in Love’s toils his fancy fed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those bright eyes, and that bright face, I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from his breast had torn his heart away.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>He with the fullest pleasure overflows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ever happy lover did content:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, lo! this time a mighty tempest rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wasted flowers, and trees uptore and rent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not with the rage with which this whirlwind blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Joust warring winds, north, south, and east, unpent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seemed, as if in search of covering shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, vainly wandering, through a desert strayed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile the unhappy lover lost the dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that dim air, nor how he lost her, weets;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, roving far and near, her beauteous name</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through every sounding wood and plain repeats.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And while, “Oh wretched me!” is his exclaim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Who has to poison changed my promised sweets?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He of his sovereign lady who with tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Demands his aid, the lamentation hears.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Thither, whence comes the sound, he swiftly hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And toils, now here, now there, with labour sore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh! what tormenting grief, to think his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cannot again the lovely rays explore!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Lo! other voice from other quarter cries⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Hope not on earth to enjoy the blessing more.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At that alarming cry he woke, and found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself in tears of bitter sorrow drowned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Not thinking that like images are vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When fear, or when desire disturbs our rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thought of her, exposed to shame and pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In such a mode upon his fancy pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, thundering, leaped from bed, and with what chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And plate behoved, his limbs all over dressed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Took Brigliadoro from the stall he filled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor any squire attendant’s service willed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>And to pass every where, yet not expose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By this his dignity to stain or slight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The old and honoured ensign he foregoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His ancient bearing, quartered red and white.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in its place a sable ensign shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perhaps as suited to his mournful plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That erst he from an Amostantes bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he had slain in fight some time before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>At midnight he departed silently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not to his uncle spake, not to his true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And faithful comrade Brandimart, whom he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So dearly cherished, even bade adieu;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when, with golden tresses streaming-free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sun from rich Tithonus’ inn withdrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And chased the shades, and cleared the humid air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king perceived Orlando was not there.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>To Charles, to his displeasure, were conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">News that his nephew had withdrawn at night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When most he lacked his presence and his aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor could he curb his choler at the flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that with foul reproach he overlaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sorely threatened the departed knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him so foul a fault should be repented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save he, returning home, his wrath prevented.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor would Orlando’s faithful Brandimart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who loved him as himself, behind him stay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether to bring him back he in his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoped, or of him ill brooked injurious say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scarce, in his impatience to depart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till fall of eve his sally would delay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest she should hinder his design, of this</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He nought imparted to his Flordelis:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>To him this was a lady passing dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from whose side he unwont to stray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Endowed with manners, grace, and beauteous cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wisdom and wit: if now he went away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And took no leave, it was because the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoped to revisit her that very day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that befel him after, as he strayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which him beyond his own intent delayed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>She when she has expected him in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well nigh a month, and nought of him discerns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sallies without a guide or faithful train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So with desire of him her bosom yearns:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many a country seeks for him in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom the story in due place returns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more I now shall tell you of these two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More bent Anglantes’ champion to pursue;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>Who having old Almontes’ blazonry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So changed, drew nigh the gate; and there the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approached a captain of the guard, when he;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I am the County,” whispered in his ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (the bridge quickly lowered, and passage free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At his commandment) by the way most near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Went straight towards the foe: but what befell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him next, the canto which ensues shall tell.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
