<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>CANTO 5</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Lurcanio, by a false report abused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deemed by Geneura's fault his brother dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weening the faithless duke, whom she refused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was taken by the damsel to her bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her before the king and peers accused:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the session Ariodantes led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strives with his brother in disguise. In season</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rinaldo comes to venge the secret treason.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Among all other animals who prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On earth, or who unite in friendly wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether they mix in peace or moody fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No male offends his mate. In safety hies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The she bear, matched with hers, through forest gray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lioness beside the lion lies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wolves, male and female, live in loving cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor gentle heifer dreads the wilful steer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>What Fury, what abominable Pest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such poison in the human heart has shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That still 'twixt man and wife, with rage possessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Injurious words and foul reproach are said?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And blows and outrage hase their peace molest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bitter tears still wash the genial bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only watered by the tearful flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But often bathed by senseless ire with blood?</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Not simply a rank sinner, he appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To outrage nature, and his God to dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who his foul hand against a woman rears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or of her head would harm a single hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But who what drug the burning entrail sears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or who for her would knife or noose prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No man appears to me, though such to sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He seem, but rather some infernal sprite.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>Such, and no other were those ruffians two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom good Rinaldo from the damsel scared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conducted to these valleys out of view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That none might wot of her so foully snared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I ended where the damsel, fair of hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To tell the occasion of her scathe prepared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the good Paladin, who brought release;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in conclusion thus my story piece.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>"Of direr deed than ever yet was done,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gentle dame began, "Sir cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Thebes, Mycene, Argos, or upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Other more savage soil, prepare to hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I believe, that if the circling sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To these our Scottish shores approach less near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than other land, 'tis that he would eschew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A foul ferocious race that shocks his view.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>"All times have shown that man has still pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hair, in every clime, his natural foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to deal death to those who seek our good</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Does from too ill and foul a nature flow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, that the truth be better understood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I shall from first to last the occasion show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why in my tender years, against all right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those caitiffs would have dome me foul despite.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>" 'Tis fitting you should know, that in the spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of life, I to the palace made resort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There served long time the daughter of the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grew with her in growth, well placed in court.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When cruel love, my fortune envying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Willed I should be his follower and his sport;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made, beyond each Scottish lord and knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albany's duke find favour in my sight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And for he seemed to cherish me above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All mean; his love a love as ardent bred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We hear, indeed, and see, but do not prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Man's faith, nor is his bosom's purpose read.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believing still, and yielding to my love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I ceased not till I took him to my bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, of all chambers, in that evil hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marked I was in Geneura's priviest bower.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Where, hoarded, she with careful privacy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Preserved whatever she esteemed most rare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There many times she slept. A gallery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From thence projected into the open air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here oft I made my lover climb to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (what he was to mount) a hempen stair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When him I to my longing arms would call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the projecting balcony let fall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>"For here my passion I as often fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As good Geneura's absence made me bold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with the varying season changed her bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To shun the burning heat or pinching cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Albany, unseen and safely sped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, fronting a dismantled street, and old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was built that portion of the palace bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor any went that way by day or night.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>"So was for many days and months maintained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By us, in secrecy, the amorous game;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still grew by love, and such new vigour gained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I in my inmost bosom felt the flame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that he little loved, and deeply feigned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weened not, so was I blinded to my shame:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though, in a thousand certain signs betrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The faithless knight his base deceit bewrayed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>"After some days, of fair Geneura he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A suitor showed himself; I cannot say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If this began before he sighed for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or, after, of this love he made assay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But judge, alas! with what supremacy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He ruled my heart, how absolute his sway!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since this he owned, and thought no shame to move</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me to assist him in his second love.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Unlike what he bore me, he said, indeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That was not true which he for her displayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But so pretending love, he hoped to speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And celebrate due spousals with the maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with her royal sire might well succeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were she consenting to the boon he prayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For after our good king, for wealth and birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all the realm, was none of equal worth.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Me he persuades, if through my ministry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He the king's son-in-law elected were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I must know he next the king would be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Advanced as high, as subject could repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The merit should be mine, and ever he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So great a benefit in mind would bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he would cherish me above his bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more than every other dame beside.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>"I, who to please him was entirely bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who never could or would gainsay his will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon those days alone enjoy content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When I find means his wishes to fulfil:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And snatch at all occasions which present</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mode, his praise and merits to instil:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for my lover with all labour strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And industry, Geneura's love to gain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"With all my heart, in furtherance of his suit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I wrought what could be done, God truly knows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with Geneura this produced no friut,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor her to grace my duke could I dispose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that another love had taken root</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In her, whose every fond affection flows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards a gentle knight of courteous lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who sought our Scotland from a distant shore:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And with a brother, then right young, to stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In our king's court, came out of Italy:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there of knightly arms made such assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was none in Britain more approved than he;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prized by the king, who (no ignoble pay),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rewarding him like his nobility,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bestowed upon the youth, with liberal hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Burghs, baronies, and castles, woods and land.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Dear to the monarch, to the daughter still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This lord was dearer, Ariodantes hight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her with affection might his valour fill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But knowledge of his love brought more delight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor old Vesuvius, nor Sicilia's hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Troy-town, ever, with a blaze so bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flamed, as with all his heart, the damsel learned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For love of her young Ariodantes burned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"The passion which she bore the lord, preferred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And loved with perfect truth and all her heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was the occassion I was still unheard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor hopeful answer would she e'er impart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still the more my lover's suit I stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to obtain his guerdon strove with art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him she would censure still, and ever more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was strengthened in the hate she nursed before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>"My wayward lover often I excite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So vain and bootless an emprize to quit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor idly hope to turn her stedfast sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too deeply with another passion smit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make apparent to the Scottish knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ariodantes such a flame had lit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the young damsel's breast, that seas in flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would not have cooled one whit her boiling blood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"This Polinesso many times had heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From me (for such the Scottish baron's name)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well warranted by sight as well as word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How ill his love was cherished by the dame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see another to himself preferred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only quenched the haughty warrior's flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the fond love, which in his bosom burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into despiteful rage and hatred turned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Between Geneura and her faithful knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such discord and ill will he schemed to shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And put betwixt the pair such foul despite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No time should heal the quarrel he had bred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bringing such scandal on that damsel bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stain should cleave to her, alive or dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, bent to wreck her on this fatal shelf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Counselled with me, or other but himself.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Dalinda mine,' he said, his project brewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Dalinda is my name) `you needs must know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That from the root although the trunk be hewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Successive suckers many times will grow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus my unhappy passion is renewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tenacious still of life, and buds; although</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cut off by ill success, with new increase:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, till I compass my desire, will cease.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Nor hope of pleasure this so much has wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that to compass my design would please;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if not in effect, at least in thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To thrive, would interpose some little ease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then every time your bower by me is sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When in her bed Geneura slumbers, seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What she puts off, and be it still your care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To dress yourself in all her daily wear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Dispose your locks and deck yourself as she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Goes decked; and, as you can, with cunning heed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Imitate her; then to the gallery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You, furnished with the corded stair, shall speed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I shall ascend it in the phantasy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That you are she, of whom you wear the weed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hope, that putting on myself this cheat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I in short time shall quench my amorous heat.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"So said the knight; and I, who was distraught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all beside myself, was not aware</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the design, in which he help besought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was manifestly but too foul a snare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in Geneura's clothes disguised, as taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let down (so oft I used) the corded stair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor I the traitor's foul deceit perceived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until the deadly mischief was achieved.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"The duke, this while, to Ariodantes' ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had these, or other words like these, addressed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For leagued in friendship were the cavaliers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till, rivals, they pursued this common quest)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"I marvel, since you are of all my peers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, whom I must have honoured and caressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And held in high regard, and cherished still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You should my benefits repay so ill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `I am assured you comprehend and know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mine and Geneura's love, and old accord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in legitimate espousal, how</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am about to claim her from my lord:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then why disturb my suit, and why bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your heart on her who offers no reward?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Heaven, I should respect your claim and place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were your condition mine, and mine your case.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>" `And I,' cried Ariodantes, `marvel more'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(In answer to the Scottish lord) `at you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since I of her enamoured was, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That gentle damsel ever met your view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And know, you are assured how evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We two have loved; — was never love more true —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are certain she alone would share my lot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And are as well assured she loves you not.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Why have not I from you the same respect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To which, for friendship past, you would pretend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From me; and I should bear you in effect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If your hope stood more fair to gain its end?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less than you, to wed her I expect;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if your fortunes here my wealth transcend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As favoured of the king, as you, above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You, am I happy in his daughter's love.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Of what a strange mistake,' (to him replied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The duke) `your foolish passion is the root!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You think yourself beloved; I, on my side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believe the same; this try we by the fruit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You of your own proceeding nothing hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I will tell the secrets of my suit:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let the man who proves least favoured, yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Provide himself elsewhere, and quit the field.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `I am prepared, if such your wish, to swear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nothing of what is told me to reveal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And will that you assure me, for your share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You shall what I recount as well conceal.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uniting in the pact, the rival pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their solemn vows upon the Bible seal:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when they had the mutual promise plighted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ariodantes first his tale recited.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Then plainly, and by simple facts averred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How with Geneura stood his suit, avows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how, engaged by writing and by word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She swore she would not be another's spouse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How, if to him the Scottish king demurred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Virgin austerity she ever vows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other bridal bond for aye eschewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To pass her days in barren solitude.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Then added, how he hoped by worth, which he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had more than once avouched, with knightly brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet might vouch, to the prosperity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And honour of the king, and of his land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To please so well that monarch, as to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him accounted worthy of the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his fair child, espoused with his consent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since he in this her wishes would content.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Then so concludes — `I stand upon this ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor I intruder fear, encroaching nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor seek I more; 'tis here my hopes I bound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, striving for Geneura's love, would I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seek surer sign of it than what is found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By God allowed, in wedlock's lawful tie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other suit were hopeless, am I sure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So excellent she is, and passing pure.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"When Ariodantes had, with honest mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Told what reward he hoped should quit his pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">False Polinesso, who before designed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make Geneura hateful to her swain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Began — `Alas! you yet are far behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My hopes, and shall confess your own are vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And say, as I the root shall manifest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of my good fortune, I alone am blest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `With you Geneura feigns, nor pays nor prizes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your passion, which with hopes and words is fed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, more than this, your foolish love despises:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this to me the damsel oft has said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of hers I am assured; of no surmises,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vain, worthless words, or idle promise bred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I to you the fact in trust reveal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though this I should in better faith conceal.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `There passes not a month, but in that space</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Three nights, four, six, and often ten, the fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Receives me with that joy in her embrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which seems to second so the warmth we share.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This you may witness, and shall judge the case;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If empty hopes can with my bliss compare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then since my happier fortune is above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your wishes, yield, and seek another love.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>" `This will I not believe,' in answer cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ariodantes, `well assured you lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that you have this string of falsehoods tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To scare me from the dear emprize I try.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But charge, so passing foul, you shall abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vouch what you have said in arms; for I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only on your tale place no reliance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But as a traitor hurl you my defiance.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>"To him rejoined the duke, 'I ween 'twere ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take the battle upon either part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since surer mean our purpose may fulfill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if it please, my proof I can impart.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ariodantes trembled, and a chill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Went through his inmost bones; and sick at heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had he in full believed his rival's boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would on the spot have yielded up the ghost.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>"With wounded heart, and faltering voice, pale face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mouth of gall, he answered, 'When I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proofs of thy rare adventure, and the grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With which the fair Geneura honours thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I promise to forego the fruitless chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of one, to thee so kind, so cold to me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But think not that thy story shall avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless my very eyes confirm the tale.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `To warn in due time shall be my care.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Said Polinesso) and so went his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two nights were scarecly passed, ere his repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the known bower was fixed for the assay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, ready now to spring his secret snare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sought his rival on the appointed day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him to hide, the night ensuing, prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I' the street, which none their habitation made.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And to the youth a station over-right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The balcony, to which he clambered, shows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ariodantes weened, this while, the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would him to seek that hidden place dispose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As one well suited to his fell despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, bent to take his life, this ambush chose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under the false pretence to make him see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What seemed a sheer impossibility.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"To go the peer resolved, but in such guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He should not be with vantage overlaid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And should he be assaulted by surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He need not be by fear of death dismay'd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had a noble brother, bold and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First of the court in arms; and on his aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lurcanio hight, relied with better heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than if ten others fought upon his part.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>"He called him to his side, and willed him take</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His arms; and to the place at evening led:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet not his secret purpose would be break;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this to him, or other would have read:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him a stone's throw removed he placed, and spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">` — Come if thou hearest he cry,' the warrior said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">`But as thou lovest me (whatsoe'er befall)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come not and move not, brother, till I call.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Doubt not' (the valiant brother said) `but go';</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thither went that baron silently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hid within the lonely house, and low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Over against my secret gallery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the other side approached the fraudful foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So pleased to work Geneura's infamy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, while I nothing of the cheat divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath my bower renews the wonted sign.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And I in costly robe, in which were set</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair stripes of gold upon a snowy ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My tresses gathered in a golden net,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shaded with tassels of vermillion round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mimicking fashions, which were only met</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fair Geneura, at the accustomed sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gallery mount, constructed in such mode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As upon every side my person showed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"This while Lurcanio, either with a view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To snares which might beset his brother's feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or with the common passion to pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And play the spy on other, where the street</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was darkest, and its deepest shadows threw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Followed him softly to his dim retreat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not ten paces from the knight aloof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bestowed himself beneath the self same roof.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Suspecting nought, I seek the balcony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the same habits which I mentioned, dressed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As more than once or twice (still happily)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I did before; meanwhile the goodly vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was in the moonlight clearly seen, and I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In aspect not unlike her, in the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resembling much Geneura's shape and cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One visage well another might appear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>"So much the more, that there was ample space</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between the palace and the ruined row:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence the two brothers, posted in that place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were lightly cheated by the lying show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now put yourself in his unhappy case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And figure what the wretched lover's woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Polinesso climbed the stair, which I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast down to him, and scaled the gallery.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Arrived, my arms about his neck I throw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weening that we unseen of others meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And kiss his lips and face with loving show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As him I hitherto was wont to greet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he assayed, with more than wonted glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me to caress, to mask his hollow cheat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Led to the shameful spectacle, aghast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That other, from afar, viewed all that passed,</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And fell into such fit of deep despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He there resolved to die; and, to that end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Planted the pommel of his falchion bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I' the ground, its point against his breast to bend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lurcanio, who with marvel by that stair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saw Polinesso to my bower ascend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But knew not who the wight, with ready speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sprang forward, when he saw his brother's deed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And hindered him in that fell agony</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From turning his own hand against his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had the good youth been later, or less nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his assistance he had vainly pressed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, `Wretched brother, what insanity.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(He cried) `your better sense has dispossessed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Die for a woman! rather let her kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be scattered like the mist before the wind!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Compass her death! 'tis well deserved; your own</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reserve, as due to more illustrious fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twas well to love, before her fraud was shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But she, once loved, now more deserves your hate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since, witnessed by your eyes, to you is known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A wanton of what sort you worshipped late.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her fault before the Scottish king to attest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reserve those arms you turn against your breast.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Ariodantes, so surprised, forewent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Joined by his brother, the design in show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But resolute to die, in his intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was little shaken: Rising thence to go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bears away a heart not simply rent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But dead and withered with excess of woe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet better comfort to Lurcanio feigns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if the rage were spent which fired his veins.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"The morn ensuing, without further say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his good brother, or to man beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from the city took his reckless way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With deadly desperation for his guide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, save the duke and knight, for many a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was there who knew what moved the youth to ride:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the palace, touching this event,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the realm, was various sentiment.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"But eight days past or more, to Scotland's court</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A traveller came, and to Geneura he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Related tidings of disastrous sort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Ariodantes perished in the sea:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drowned of his own free will was the report,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No wind to blame for the calamity!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since from a rock, which over ocean hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the raging waves he headlong sprung;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Who said, before he reached that frowning crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To me, whom he encountered by the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come with me, that your tongue may manifest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what betides me to Geneura say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tell her, too, the occasion of the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which you shall witness without more delay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In having seen too much, the occasion lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Happy had I been born without these eyes!"</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>" `By chance, upon a promontory we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were standing, overright the Irish shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, speaking thus on that high headland, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plunged from a rock amid the watery roar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I saw him leap, and left him in the sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, hurrying thence, to you the tidings bore.'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Geneura stood amazed, her colour fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, at the fearful tale, remained half dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>"O God! what said, what did she, when alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She on her faithful pillow layed her head!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She beat her bosom, and she tore her gown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in despite her golden tresses shed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Repeating often, in bewildered tone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The last sad words which Ariodantes said; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the sole source of such despair, and such</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disaster, was that he had seen too much.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Wide was the rumour scattered that the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had slain himself for grief; nor was the cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By courtly dame, or courtly cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or by the monarch, heard with tearless eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, above all the rest, his brother dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was whelmed with sorrow of so deep a dye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, bent to follow him, he well nigh turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His hand against himself, like him he mourned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And many times repeating in his thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It was Geneura who his brother slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was to self-destruction moved by nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But her ill deed, which he was doomed to view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So on his mind the thirst of vengeance wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so his grief his season overthrew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he thought little, graced of each estate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To encounter king and people's common hate;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And, when the throng was fullest in the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood up before the Scottish king, and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">`Of having marred my brother's wits withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir king, and him to his destruction led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your daughter only can I guilty call:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For in his inmost soul such sorrow bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The having seen her little chastity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He loathed existence, and preferred to die.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>" `He was her lover; and for his intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was honest, this I seek not, I, to veil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to deserve her by his valour meant</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of thee, if faithful service might avail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But while he stood aloof, and dared but scent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The blossoms, he beheld another scale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scale the forbidden tree with happier boot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bear away from him the wished-for fruit.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Then added, how into the gallery came</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Geneura, and how dropped the corded stair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how into the chamber of the dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had climbed a leman of that lady fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, for disguise (he knew not hence his name),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had changed his habits, and concealed his hair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in conclusion, vowed that every word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So said, he would avouch with lance and sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"You may divine how grieves the sire, distraught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With woe, when he the accusation hears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well that what he never could have thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He of his daughter learns with wondering ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that he knows, if succour be not brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By cavalier, that in her cause appears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who may upon Lurcanio prove the lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He cannot choose, but doom the maid to die.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"I do not think our Scottish law to you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is yet unknown, which sentences to fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The miserable dame, or damsel, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grants other than her wedded lord's desire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She dies, unless a champion, good and true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arm on her side before a month expire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her against the accuser base maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unmeriting such death, and free from stain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"The king has made proclaim by town and tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For he believes her wronged, his child to free)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her he shall have to wife, with ample dower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who saves the royal maid from infamy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But each to the other looks, and to this hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No champion yet, 'tis said, appears: for he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lurcanio, is esteemed so fierce in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seems as he were feared of every knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"And evil Fate has willed her brother dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino, is not here the foe to face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since many months has roved the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proving his matchless worth with spear and mace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if the valiant champion were more near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Such is his courage) or in any place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither in time the news might be conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would not fail to bear his sister aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>"The king, mean time, who would the quest pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by more certain proof than combat, try</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If the accuser's tale be false or true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she deserve, or merit not, to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrests some ladies of her retinue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, as he weens, the fact can verify.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence I foresaw, that if I taken were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too certain risque the duke and I must share.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"That very night I from the palace flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the duke repair, escaped from court;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, were I taken, make him plainly see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How much it either's safety would import:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He praised, and bade me of good courage be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for his comfort, prayed me to resort</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a strong castle which he held hard by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gave me two to bear me company.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"With what full proofs, sir stranger, you have heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I of my love assured the Scottish peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And clearly can discern, if so preferred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That lord was justly bound to hold me dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mark, in conclusion, what was my reward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The glorious meed of my great merit hear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And say if woman can expect to earn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">However well she love, her love's return.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"For this perfidious, foul, ungrateful man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length suspicious of my faith and zeal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And apprehending that his wily plan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In course of time, I haply might reveal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feigned that meanwhile the monarch's anger ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too high, he would withdraw me, and conceal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within a fortress of his own, where I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Such was his real end) was doomed to die.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"For secretly the duke enjoined the guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with me through the gloomy forest went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The worthy guerdon of a faith so tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To slay me; and had compassed his intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for your ready succour, when I cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold! what wages love's poor slaves content."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus to Rinaldo did Dalinda say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As they together still pursued their way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Above all other fortune, to the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was welcome to have found the gentle maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who the whole story of Geneura bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her unblemished innocence displayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if he hoped, although accused with right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To furnish the afflicted damsel aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Persuaded of the calumny's disproof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with more courage warred in her behoof.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And for St. Andrew's town, with eager speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where was the king with all his family,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where the single fight, in listed mead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his daughter's quarrel, was to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The good Rinaldo pricked, nor spared his steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until, within an easy distance, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now near the city, met a squire who brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More recent tidings than the damsel taught:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>That thither had repaired a stranger knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To combat in Geneura's quarrel bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With ensigns strange, not known of living wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since ever close concealed the warrior went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not, since he had been there, had bared to sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His visage, aye within his helmet pent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that the very squire who with him came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swore that he knew not what the stranger's name.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Not far they ride before the walls appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now before the gate their coursers stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To advance the sad Dalinda was in fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet followed, trusting in Rinaldo's brand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gate was shut, and to the porter near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What this implies Rinaldo makes demand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him was said, the people, one and all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were trooped to see a fight without the wall:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Beyond the city, fought upon accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between Lurcanio and a stranger knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, on a spacious meadow's level sward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pair already had begun the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The porter opened to Mount Alban's lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And straight behind the peer the portal hight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo through the empty city rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But in a hostel first the dame bestowed:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>And will that she (he will not long delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek her there) till his return repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And quickly to the lists pursued his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the two made that fell exchange of blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And strove and struggled yet in bloody fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lurcanio's heart with vengeful hatred glows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against Geneura; while that other knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well maintains the quarrel for her right.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Six knights on foot within the palisade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stand covered with the corslet's iron case;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the Duke of Albany arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Borne on a puissant steed of noble race:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who there, as lord high-constable obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was keeper of the field and of the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And joyed Geneura's peril to espy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With swelling bosom and exulting eye.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo pierces through the parted swarm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So wide is felt the good Bayardo's sway,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he who hears the courser come in storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Halts not, in his desire to make him way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above is seen Rinaldo's lofty form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flower of those who mix in martial fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He stops his horse before the monarch's chair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While all to hear the paladin repair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Dread sir," to him the good Rinaldo said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Let not the pair this combat longer ply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since whichsoever of the two falls dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Know, that you let him perish wrongfully:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This thinks that he is right, and is misled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vouches the false, and knows not 'tis a lie:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since that which brought his brother to his end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moves him in causeless battle contend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"That, in pure gentleness, with little care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If what he here maintains be wrong or right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he would preserve a maid so fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perils his person in the furious fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To injured innocence I safety bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the evil man its opposite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first, for love of God, the battle stay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then list, sir king, to what I shall display."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>So moved the king the grave authority</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of one who seemed so worthy, by his cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he made sign the battle should not be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Further continued then with sword or spear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom, together with his chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And barons of the realm and others near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo all the treacherous plot displayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Polinesso for Geneura layed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Next that he there in arms would testify</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The truth of what he vouched, the warrior cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">False Polinesso, called, with troubled eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood forth, but daringly the tale denied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him the good Rinaldo in reply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"By deeds be now the doubtful quarrel tried."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The field was cleared, and, ready armed, the foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without more let, in deadly duel close.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>How was the hope to king and people dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The proof might show Geneura innocent!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All trust that God will make the treason clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And show she was accused with foul intent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Polinesso, greedy and severe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And proud was held, and false and fraudulent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that none there, of all assembled, deemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It marvel, if the knight such fraud had schemed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>False Polinesso, with a mien distressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A pallid cheek, and heart which thickly beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the third trumpet, laid his lance in rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well Rinaldo spurred the knight to meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And levelled at his evil foeman's breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eager to finish at a single heat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor counter to his wish was the event;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since through the warrior half his weapon went.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Him, through his breast, impaled upon the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than six yards beyond his horse he bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With speed alighted Mount Albano's peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, ere he rose, unlaced the helm he wore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he for mercy prayed with humble cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unfit to strive in joust or warfare more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, before king and court, with faltering breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Confessed the fraud which brought him to his death.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>He brings not his confession to a close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pangs of death the failing accents drown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prince, who ended saw his daughter's woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Redeemed from death and scorn, her virtue shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With more delight and rapture overflows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than if he, having lost his kingly crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then saw it first upon his head replaced;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that he good Rinaldo singly graced.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>And when, through his uplifted casque displaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Features, well known before, the king descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His thanks to God with lifted hands he paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he had deigned such succour to provide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That other cavalier, who bared his blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unknown of all, upon Geneura's side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thither came from far, his aid to impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Looked upon all that passed, and stood apart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>Him the good king entreated to declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His name, or, at the least, his visage shew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he might grace him with such guerdon fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to his good intent was justly due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stranger, after long and earnest prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lifted to covering casque, and bared to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What in the ensuing canto will appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If you are fain the history to hear.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
