<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-13" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>The Count Orlando of the damsel bland</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who loves Zerbino, hears the piteous woes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next puts to death the felons with his hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who pent her there. Duke Aymon’s daughter goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking Rogero, where so large a band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The old Atlantes’ magic walls enclose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her he impounds, deceived by fictions new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Agramant ranks his army for review.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Those ancient cavaliers right happy were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Born in an age, when, in the gloomy wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In valley, and in cave, wherein the bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Serpent, or lion, hid their savage brood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They could find that, which now in palace rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is hardly found by judges proved and good;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Women, to wit, who in their freshest days</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of beauty worthily deserve the praise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Above I told you how a gentle maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando had discovered under ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And asked, “by whom she thither was conveyed?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursuing now my tale, I tell, how drowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In grief (her speech by many a sob delayed),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel fair, in sweet and softest sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Summing them with what brevity she might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her ills recounted to Anglantes’ knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>“Though I am sure,” she said, “O cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To suffer punishment for what I say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because I know, to him who pens me here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This woman quickly will the fact display;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I would not but thou shouldst the story hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—And let my wretched life the forfeit pay!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For what can wait me better than that he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My gaoler, should one day my death decree?</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Lo! I am Isabel, who once was styled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The daughter of Gallicia’s hapless king:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I said aright who <em>was</em>; but now the child</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(No longer <em>his</em>) of care and suffering:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fault of Love, by whom I was beguiled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For against him alone this charge I bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who sweetly, at the first, our wish applauds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And weaves in secret but deceit and frauds.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>“Whilom I lived, content in Fortune’s smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rich, blameless, fair, and young; to sad reverse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Condemned, I now am wretched, poor, and vile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in worse case, if any yet be worse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But it is fitting, I to thee this while</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From their first root my troubles should rehearse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And it will soothe me, though of thee I borrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No help, that thou compassionate my sorrow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>“My father in his city of Bayonne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(To-day will be twelve months) a tourney dight;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-157" id="noteref-157" epub:type="noteref">157</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence, led by spreading rumour to our town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To joust, from different lands came many a knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid these (was it his manifest renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or was it love which so deceived my sight)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Praise in my eyes alone Zerbino won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was the mighty king of Scotland’s son.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>“When him I after in the field espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Performing wondrous feats of chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I was surprised by Love, ere I descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That freedom in my Love, so rash a guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I lay this unction to my phantasy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That no unseemly place my heart possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fixed on the worthiest in the world and best.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“In beauty and in valour’s boast above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those other lords the Scottish prince stood high.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He showed me, and, I think, be bore me love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And left no less an ardent flame than I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor lacked there one who did between us move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To speak our common wishes frequently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So could we still in heart and mind unite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although disjoined from one another’s sight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Hence, when concluded was the festal show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to his home Zerbino was returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thou know’st what is love, thou well may’st know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How night and day I for the warrior yearned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was assured, no less on him did prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flame, that in his constant bosom burned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, save a way to have me with him, nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For solace of his restless passion sought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>“For different faith forbade him (on my side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I was a Saracen, a Christian he)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To ask me of my father as a bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By stealth he purposed to elope with me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid green fields, our wealthy town beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I had a garden, seated by the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the pleasant shore; from whence the eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might ocean and the hills about descry.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>“A fitting place to effect what different creed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And law forbade us, he esteemed this site,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And showed the order taken for the deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which was to make our future life’s delight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how, near Santa Martha, for our need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A bark was with arm’d men in ambush dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under Sir Odoric of Biscay’s command;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A leader he, approved by sea and land!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Unable in his person this to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For by his father he was forced to wend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In succour of the king of France, in lieu</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This Odoric for the purpose he would send;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chosen, of all his faithful friends and true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As his most faithful and his truest friend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such had been, if benefits could bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And goodly deeds the friendship of mankind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“At the time fixed to bear me thence away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This chief would anchor on the destined ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—And thus it was arrived the wished-for day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When I of them was in my garden found.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Odoric, at night, with fair array</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of valiant men, by land and sea renowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the near river from his bark descends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thence in silence to my garden wends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“To the pitched bark with me his party sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the city knew what was at hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some of the house, disarmed and naked, fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And some were slain; while of the helpless band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With me, another part was captive led.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So was I severed from my native land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping in brief Zerbino to possess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I cannot tell thee with what happiness.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Scarcely was Mongia by our galley doubled,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-158" id="noteref-158" epub:type="noteref">158</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere a squall took us on the larboard side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which round about the clear horizon troubled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stirred and tost heaven-high the foaming tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote with a north-west wind, next, ocean bubbled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which on her other beam the vessel plied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This evermore increases, with such force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Starboard or larboard, boots not which our course.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“It steads not to strike sail, nor lash the mast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lowered on the gang-board, nor our castles fell;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-159" id="noteref-159" epub:type="noteref">159</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bark, in our despite, is hurried fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the pointed rocks about Rochelle:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save <b>He</b>, above, assist us at the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cruel storm will us ashore impel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Driven thither by ill wind with mightier speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than ever bow-string gave to whistling reed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Our peril well does the Biscayan note,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tries what often has an evil end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lowers down the galley’s skiff, and, when afloat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descends into it, and makes me descend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two follow, and a troop would throng the boat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did not the first prevent them, and defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The entrance with their naked faulchions; we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sever the rope forthwith, and put to sea.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-160" id="noteref-160" epub:type="noteref">160</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Driven landward, on the shore we safely light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in the skiff embarked; while of our band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest in the split vessel sink outright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our goods sea-swallowed all. Upon the strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To <b>Eternal Love</b>, to <b>Goodness Infinite</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I offer up my thanks, with outstretched hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I was doomed not ’mid the watery roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To perish, nor behold Zerbino more.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Though I had left on shipboard matters rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And precious in their nature, gem and vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So I might hope Zerbino’s lot to share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I was content the sea should have the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No dwelling on the beach appears, nor there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is any pathway seen, by footsteps pressed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Only a hill, whose woody top is beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By ceaseless winds, the waters bathe its feet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Here the fell tyrant Love, aye prompt to range,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And faithless to his every promise still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who watches ever how he may derange</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mar our every reasonable will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Converts, with woeful and disastrous change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My comfort to despair, my good to ill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he, in whom Zerbino put his trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cooled in his loyal faith, and burned with lust.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Whether he his desire had nursed at sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had not dared exhibit it before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or that it sprung from opportunity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suggested by that solitary shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without more pause, in that lone desert, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would sate his greedy passion; but forbore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he of one could rid him, of the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in the boat with us had scaped the main.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“A man of Scotland he, Almonio hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to Zerbino seemed great faith to bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as a perfect warrior by the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Praised, when to Odoric given, his trust to share:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him (the Spaniard said) it were a slight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I unto Rochelle afoot should fare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prayed, that he before would thither speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And forward thence some hackney, for my need.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Almonio, who in this suspects no ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith, before our party, wends his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the town, hidden by the wooded hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And which not more than six miles distant lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the other finally his wicked will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Odoric took courage to display;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well because he could not rid him thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that in him he had great confidence.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“He that remained with us, of whom I said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before, Corebo was of Bilbao hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with him under the same roof was bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From infancy, and the ungrateful wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deemed that the thought he harboured in his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He could impart in safety to the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would prefer, neglected of his trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pleasure of his friend to what was just.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Not without high disdain Corebo heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Who kind and courteous was) the Biscayneer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And termed him traitor; and by deed and word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Withstood the purpose of his foul compeer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This mighty wrath in either warrior stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In sign whereof their naked brands they rear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At sight of their drawn swords, in panic, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turn shortly through the gloomy wood to fly.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Sir Odoric in war well taught and bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gained in few blows such vantage in the fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He left Corebo on the field for dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, following in my steps, pursued my way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love lent to him (unless I am misled)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pinions, that he might overtake his prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many a prayer and glozing flattery taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith I to compliance might be wrought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“But all in vain, for I was fixed and bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than sate his ill desire, to die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When menace had by him been vainly spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every prayer and every flattery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would by open force his will content;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor boots it aught that I entreaties try;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his lord’s faith in him the wretch remind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how myself I to his hands resigned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“When I perceived that fruitless was my prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that I could not hope for other aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he assailed me like a famished bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hands and feet I fierce resistance made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he more brutal waxed, and plucked his hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with my teeth and nails his visage flayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while I vent such lamentable cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The clamour echoes to the starry skies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Were they by chance conducted, or my shriek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which might have well been heard a league around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Or, was it they were wont the shore to seek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When any vessel split or ran aground)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I saw a crowd appear upon the peak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, to the sea descending, towards us wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Them the Biscayan say, and at the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abandoned his design, and turned to flight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“This rabble, sir, against that treacherous man</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Comes to my aid; but in such guise, that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The homely saw, of falling from the pan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the fire beneath, but verify.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis true so lost I was not, nor that clan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accursed with minds of such iniquity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they to violate my person sought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though nothing good or virtuous on them wrought:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“But that they knew, for me preserved a maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As yet I am, they higher price might crave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eight months are past, the ninth arrived, since, stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By them, alive I languish in this grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All hope is lost of my Zerbino’s aid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For from their speech I gather, as a slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am bartered to a merchant for his gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom I to the sultan shall be sold.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>The gentle damsel so her tale pursues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While sobs and sighs oft interposing break</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her soft angelic voice, which might infuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Compassion into asp, or venomed snake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time she so her piteous grief renews</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or haply does her bitter anguish slake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some twenty men the gloomy cavern fill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This armed with hunting-spear, and that with bill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>With squinting look and dark, and but one eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The leader of the troop, of brutish cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was he, the foremost of the company;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By a blow blinded, which from nose to ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had cleft his jaw: when he did so descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seated beside the maid, that cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He turned about and said; “Lo! in the net</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another bird for whom it was not set!”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Then to the county cried; “I never knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A man more opportune my wants to stead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not whether any one to you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perchance may have announced my pressing need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of such fair arms⁠—or you conjectured true⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well as of that goodly sable weed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You verily arrived in season are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My needs (pursued the losel) to repair.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>With bitter smile, upstarting on his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando to the ruffian made reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Thou at a price at which no chapman treat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unmarked in merchant’s books, these arms shalt buy:”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that he snatched a brand, which, full of heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And smoke, was smouldering in the chimney nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threw it, and smote by chance the knave half blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where with the nose the meeting brows confined.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The brand discharged by him, hit either brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But most severely on the left did smite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that ill feature perished by the blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which was the thief’s sole minister of light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor is the stroke content to blind the foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unsated, save it register his sprite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among those damned souls, whom Charon keeps,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-161" id="noteref-161" epub:type="noteref">161</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With their companions, plunged in boiling deeps.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>A spacious table in mid cavern stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two palms in thickness, in its figure square;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Propt on one huge, ill-fashioned food and rude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which held the thief and all who harboured there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even with such freedom as his dart of wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We mark the nimble Spaniard launch through air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heavy table Roland seized and threw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, crowded close together, stood the crew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>One had his belly crushed, and one his breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another head or arm, or leg and thigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence some were slain outright, and maimed the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While he who was least injured sought to fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis so sometimes, with heavy stone oppressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A knot of slimy snakes is seen to lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With battered heads and loins, where, winter done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They lick their scales, rejoicing in the sun.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>I could not say what mischiefs these offend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One dies, and one departs without its tail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another crippled cannot move an end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wriggling wreathes its length without avail:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While this, whom more propitious saints befriend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Safe through the grass drags off its slimy trail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dire was the stroke; yet should no wonder breed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since good Orlando’s arm achieved the deed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>Those whom the board had little maimed or nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Turpin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-162" id="noteref-162" epub:type="noteref">162</a> says there were seven) in craven wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their safety in their feet, yet vainly, sought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For to the cavern’s door Orlando hies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having them without resistance caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fast with a rope their hands behind them ties;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A rope, which in the cavern on the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Convenient for his purpose he had found.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>He after drags them bound without the cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where an old service-tree its shadow throws.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando lops the branches with his glaive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hangs the thieves, a banquet for the crows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor chain and crook for such a deed did crave:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ready hooks the tree itself bestows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To purge the world; where by the chin up-hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These, on the branches, bold Orlando strung.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>The ancient woman, the assassin’s friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Escapes when she perceives that all are dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, threading that green labyrinth without end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laments, and plucks the hair from off her head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By fear impelled, through paths which sore offend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her feet, till she, beside a river’s bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encounters with a warrior: but to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was the stranger champion I delay;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And turn to her, who to the count applied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Praying he would not leave her there alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vowed to follow whither he would guide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando her consoles in courteous tone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thence, when, with a wreath of roses tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About her brows, and robed in purple gown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On wonted journey white Aurora starts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paladin with Isabel departs.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Without encountering aught that might appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthy of note, they wended many a day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And finally the twain a cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As prisoner led, encountered by the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who shall be told; but, tale to you as dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now calls me from the beaten path away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Of Aymon’s daughter⁠—whom I left above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Languid and lost in all the pains of love.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>The beauteous lady who desires in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero should not his return delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lies in Marseilles, from whence the paynim train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She harasses, nigh each returning day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(What time they robbing aye, by hill and plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scower fruitful Languedoc and Provence gay)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the true duty executes aright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a sage leader and a valiant knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The time long past, she, lying in that place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had hoped that her Rogero would appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, not beholding him in all that space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of many evil chances lived in fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One day, mid others that her woeful case</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady wept alone, to her drew near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dame, who with that healing ring made sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bosom rankling with Alcina’s wound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>When her she saw, without her love returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Such time elapsed, her mission incomplete),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore trembling, faint, and pale, her heart so yearned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She scarce had strength to stand upon her feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the enchantress kind, when she discerned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her fear, advanced with smiles the maid to meet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to console her such glad visage wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As messenger who joyful tidings bore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Fear not for thy Rogero; he is well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And safe (she cried), and ever worships thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As wonted; but thy foe, that wizard fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him yet again deprives of liberty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And it behoves thee now to climb the sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would’st thou posses him, and to follow me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if thou wendest with me, I will lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither, by thee Rogero shall be freed.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And next pursued, relating to her all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The frauds and magic of Atlantes hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That wearing her fair face, who seemed the thrall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of an ill giant, him had through the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of gold, enticed into the enchanted hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And after disappeared, the youth before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And told how dames and cavaliers he cheats</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thither make resort, with like deceits.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>“Seeing the sage, all think they see a squire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Companion, lady-love, or absent friend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whatever is each several wight’s desire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since to our scope our wishes never tend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence searching every where, themselves they tire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With labour sore, and frustrate of their end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cannot, (so Desire and Hope deceive),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without the missing good, that palace leave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>“As soon as thou (pursued the dame) art near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The place where he has built the magic seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resembling thy Rogero in his cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every look, Atlantes thee shall meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make himself by his ill art appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As suffering from some stronger arm defeat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou may’st aid him in the peril feigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus among those others be detained.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>“To the end thou may’st escape his ambush, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many and so many, thus betrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have fallen; though he Rogero seem, beware</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To lend him faith, who will demand thine aid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, when the sage presents himself, forbear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take his worthless life with lifted blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor think to slay Rogero with the blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But him who works thee still such cruel woe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Hard will it seem to slay, full well I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wight, in whom Rogero you descry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, for truth is not in the lying show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trust not to sight where magic blears the eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fix, ere with me you to the forest go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To change not when the traitorous foe is nigh:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For never shall with you Rogero wive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If weakly you the wizard leave alive.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The valorous maid with the intent to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The false enchanter, on her plan decides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Snatches her arms, and follows on her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melissa sage, in whom she so confides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus, by fruitful field or forest gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her by forced journeys that enchantress guides;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And studies to beguile their weary course</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ever, as best she may, with sweet discourse:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>And as the fairest topic of all those</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which might be grateful to the damsel’s ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her future offspring and Rogero’s chose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(A race of demigods) in prince and peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For as Melissa all the secrets knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the eternal gods who rule our sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The good enchantress can discover all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which should in many ages hence befall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Oh! my best guide.” exclaimed the damsel bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the weird-woman that to aid her came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“As thou hast many years before foretold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Men who shall glorify my race and name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So now I pray thee, lady, to unfold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The praise and virtues of some noble dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If from my lineage any such shall rise.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom Melissa courteously replies:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Chaste dames of thee descended I survey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mothers of those who wear imperial crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mighty kings; the column and the stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of glorious realms and houses of renown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as thy sons will shine in arms, so they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will no less fame deserve in female gown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With piety and sovereign prudence graced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And noble hearts, incomparably chaste.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And if at length, I should relate to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The praise of all who from thy root ascend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too long my tale would hold, nor do I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom I could pass, where all to fame pretend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But from a thousand I some two or three</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will choose, because my tale may have an end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why was not in the cave thy wish made known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where I their shadows might as well have shown?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“To hear of one of thy famed race prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom liberal studies and good works engage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of whom, I know not well, if she more fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May be entitled, or more chaste and sage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The noble-minded Isabel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-163" id="noteref-163" epub:type="noteref">163</a> who, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It stands on Minciu’s bank, in other age</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall gild the town, of Ocnus’ mother hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her own glorious rays by day and night;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Where, with her worthiest consort she will strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In honoured and in splendid rivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which best shall prize the virtues’ goodly train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And widest ope the gates to courtesy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he by Taro, and in Naples’ reign,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-164" id="noteref-164" epub:type="noteref">164</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(’Tis said), from Gauls delivered Italy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twill be replied. Penelope the chaste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As such, was not beneath Ulysses placed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Great things and many thus I sum in few</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of this brave dame, and others leave behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which when I from the vulgar herd withdrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sage Merlin from the hollow stone divined.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I should leave old Typhis<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-165" id="noteref-165" epub:type="noteref">165</a> out of view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If on such sea I launched before the wind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with this finish my prophetic strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—All blessings on her head the skies will rain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“With her shall be her sister Beatrice,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-166" id="noteref-166" epub:type="noteref">166</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose fortunes well shall with her name accord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, while she lives, not only shall not miss</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What good the heavens to those below afford,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But make, with her, partaker of her bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First among wealthy dukes, her cherished lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who shall, when she from hence receives her call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the lowest depth of misery fall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Viscontis’ serpents will be held in dread,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-167" id="noteref-167" epub:type="noteref">167</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Moro and Sforza, while this dame shall be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Hyperborean snows to billows red;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Ind to hills, which to a double sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afford a passage;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-168" id="noteref-168" epub:type="noteref">168</a> and, the lady dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the sore mischief of all Italy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will with the Insubri into slavery fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And men shall sovereign wisdom fortune call.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Other the same illustrious name will bear,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-169" id="noteref-169" epub:type="noteref">169</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who will flourish many years before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pannonia’s garland one of these shall wear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another matron on the Ausonian shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When she shall be released from earthly care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Men will among the blessed saints adore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With incense will approach the dame divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hang with votive images her shrine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“The others I shall pass in silence by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ’twere too much (as said before) to sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their fame; though each might well deserve, that high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heroic trump should in her praise be wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence the Biancas and Lucretias I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Constances and more reserve; who found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or else repair, upon Italian land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Illustrious houses with supporting hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Thy race, which shall all else in this excel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the rare fortune of its women thrives;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor of its daughters’ honour more I tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than of the lofty virtue of its wives:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that thou may’st take note of this as well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Merlin said of thy descendents’ lives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Haply that I the story might narrate)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This I no little covet to relate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Of good Richarda first shall be my strain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-170" id="noteref-170" epub:type="noteref">170</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mirror of chastity and fortitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, young, remains a widow, in disdain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fortune: (that which oft awaits the good)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exiles, and cheated of their father’s reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She shall behold the children of her blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wandering into the clutches of their foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet find at last a quittance for her woe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Nor sprung from the ancient root of Aragon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I of the gorgeous queen will silent be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than whom more prudent or more chaste is none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Renowned in Greek or Latin history;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor who so fortunate a course will run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After that, by divine election, she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall with the goodly race of princes swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alphonso, Hyppolite, and Isabel.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“The prudent Eleanour is this; a spray<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-171" id="noteref-171" epub:type="noteref">171</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which will be grafted on thy happy tree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What of the fruitful stepchild shall I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in succession next to her I see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lucretia Borgia?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-172" id="noteref-172" epub:type="noteref">172</a> who, from day to day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall wax in beauty, virtue, chastity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fortune, that like youthful plant will shoot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which into yielding soil has struck its root.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“As tin by silver, brass by gold, as Corn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poppy beside the deeply-crimsoning rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Willow by laurel evergreen, as shorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of light, stained glass by gem that richly glows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—So by this dame I honour yet unborn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each hitherto distinguished matron shows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For beauty and for prudence claiming place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all praise-worthy excellence and grace.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“And above every other noble praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which shall distinguished her alive or dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is that by her shall be, through kingly ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her Hercules and other children led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thus the seeds of worth in early days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bloom in council and in camp, will shed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For long wine’s savour lingers in the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the new vessel, whether bad or good.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Nor the step-daughter of this noble dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will I, Renata,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-173" id="noteref-173" epub:type="noteref">173</a> hight of France, forget,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Louis born, twelfth monarch of his name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Bretagne’s pride; all virtues ever yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bestowed on woman, since the ruddy flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has warmed, or water had the power to wet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or overhead the circling heavens have rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">United in Renata I behold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Twere long to tell of Alda de Sansogna,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-174" id="noteref-174" epub:type="noteref">174</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or of Celano’s countess in this string,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Blanche Maria, stiled of Catalonia;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or her, the daughter of Sicilia’s king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or of the beauteous Lippa de Bologna,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or more, with whose renown the world shall ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To speak whose separate praise with fitting lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were to attempt a sea without a shore.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>When of the larger portion of her seed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king enchantress at full ease had told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oft and oft rehearsed, amid the rede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What arts Rogero to the wizard’s hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had drawn, Melissa halted near the mead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where stood the mansion of Atlantes old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would approach the magic dome more nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest her the false magician should espy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>And yet again advised the martial maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Counsel she had a thousand times bestowed)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then left, Nor Bradamant through greenwood shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than two miles in narrow path had rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before, by two fierce giants overlaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She saw a knight, who like Rogero showed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So closely pressed, and labouring sore for breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he appeared well nigh reduced to death.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>When she beheld him in such perilous strait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who of Rogero all the tokens wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She quickly lost the faith she nourished late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quickly her every fair design forbore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She weens Melissa bears Rogero hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For some new injury unheard before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with unheard of hate and wrong, her foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would by her hand destroy who loves him so.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>She cried, “And is not this Rogero, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye present to my heart, is now to sight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If ’tis not him whom I agnize and view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom e’er shall I agnize or view aright?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why should I other’s judgment deem more true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than the belief that’s warranted by sight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even without eyes, and by my heart alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he were near or distant, would be shown.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>While so the damsel thinks, a voice she hears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, like Rogero’s, seems for aid to cry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the same time, the worsted knight appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To slack the bridle and the rowels ply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While at full speed the goaded courser clears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His ground, pursued by either enemy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor paused the dame, in following them who sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His life, till to the enchanted palace brought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Of which no sooner has she past the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than she is cheated by the common show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each crooked way or straight her feet explore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within it and without, above, below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor rests she night or day, so strong the lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the enchanter, who has ordered so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She (though they still encounter and confer)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knows not Rogero, nor Rogero her.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>But leave we Bradamant, nor grieve, O ye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who hear, that she is prisoned by the spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since her in fitting time I shall set free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And good Rogero, from the dome as well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As taste is quickened by variety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So it appears that, in the things I tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wider here and there my story ranges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It will be found less tedious for its changes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Meseems that I have many threads to clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the great web I labour evermore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And therefore be ye not displeased to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How, all dislodged, the squadrons of the Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threatening the golden lines loud, appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In arms, the royal Agramant before:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who bids for a review his army post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Willing to know the numbers of his host.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>For besides horse and foot, in the campaign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore thinned, whose numbers were to be supplied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had many captains, and those good, of Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Libya, and of Aethiopia, died;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus the nations, and the various train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wandered without a ruler or a guide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To give to each its head and order due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ample camp is mustered in review.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>To fill the squadrons ravaged by the sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In those fierce battles and those conflicts dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><em>This</em> to his Spain, to his Africa <em>that</em> lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sent to recruit, where well their files they fed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next distributed the paynim horde</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under their proper captains, ranged and led.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, with your leave, till other strain, delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The order of the muster to display.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
