<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-39" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Agramant breaks the pact, is overthrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forced fair France for Afric to forego.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meanwhile Astolpho in Biserta’s town</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having with numerous host besieged the foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By hazard there arrives bold Milo’s son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the duke, instructed how to do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Restores his wits. At sea does Dudon meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">King Agramant, and sore annoys his fleet.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Than that fell woe which on Rogero weighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Harder, and bitterer pain forsooth is none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which upon flesh and more on spirit preys:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For of two deaths there is no scaping one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, if in strife o’erlaid, Rinaldo slays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant, if Rinaldo is outdone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if he killed her brother, well he knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her hate, than death more hateful, would ensue.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo, unimpeded by such thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strove in all ways Rogero to o’erthrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fierce and despiteous whirled his axe, and sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now in the arms, now head, to wound the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero circled here and there, and caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his weapon’s shaft the coming blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if ever smote, aye strove to smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he should injure least Montalban’s knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>To most of them that led the paynim bands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But too unequal seemed the fierce assay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too slowly young Rogero plied his hands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too well Rinaldo kept the Child at bay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With troubled face the king of Afric stands:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sighed, and breathless gazed upon the fray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the blame of that ill counsel flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On King Sobrino’s head, from whom it sprung.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile the weird Melissa, she⁠—the font</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all that wizards or enchanters know⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had by her art transformed her female front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And taken Argier’s mighty shape; in show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gesture she appeared as Rodomont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seemed, like him, in dragon’s hide to go:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such was her belied sword and such her shield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor aught was wanting which he wore afield.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>She towards Troyano’s mournful son did guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In form of courser, a familiar sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with a troubled visage loudly cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“My liege, this is too foul an oversight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A stripling boy in peril yet untried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against a Gaul, so stout and famed in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your champion in so fierce a strife to make;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Afric’s realm and honour are at stake.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Let not this battle be pursued, my lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that ’twould cost our Moorish cause too dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let sin of broken faith and forfeit word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fall upon Rodomont! take thou no fear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let each now show the metal of his sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each for a hundred stands when I am here.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So upon Agramant this counsel wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That king pressed forward without further thought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>He, thinking that the monarch of Algiers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is with him, of the pact has little care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would not rate a thousand cavaliers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So high, if handed in his aid they were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence steeds reined-in and spurred, hence levelled spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are seen in one short instant here and there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melissa, when the hosts are mixed in fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By her false phantoms, vanishes from sight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The champions two, that, against all accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against all faith, disturbed their duel see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No longer strive in fight, but pledge their word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Yea, put aside all hostile injury⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they, on neither part, will draw the sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until they better certified shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who broke the pact, established by that twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Young Agramant, or aged Charlemagne.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>They sweat anew, the king who had o’erthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That truce, and broken faith, as foe to treat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The field of combat is turned upside down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some hurry to the charge, and some retreat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who most deserved disgrace, who most renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was seen, on both hands, in the selfsame feat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All ran alike: but, ’mid that wild affray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These ran to meet the foe, those ran away.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>As greyhound in the slip, that the fleet hare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scowering about and circling him discerns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor with the other dogs a part can bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For him the hunter holds), with anger burns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Torments himself and mourns in his despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whines, and strives against the leash, by turns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such till that moment had the fury been</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Aymon’s daughter and the martial queen.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>They till that hour upon the spacious plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had watched so rich a prize throughout the day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as obliged by treaty to refrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From laying hands upon the costly prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had sore lamented and had grieved in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gazing with longing eyes on that array.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now seeing truce and treaty broke, among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moorish squadrons they rejoicing sprung.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa piercing her first victim’s breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Two yards beyond his back the lance did pass)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In briefer time than ’tis by me exprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Broke with her sword four helms which flew like glass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less did Bradamant upon the rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But them her spear reduced to other pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All touched by that gold lance she overthrew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doubling Marphisa’s score; yet none she slew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>They witness to each others’ exploits are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Those maids to one another are so near)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, whither fury drives, the martial pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dividing, through the Moorish ranks career.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who could each several warrior’s name declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stretched on the champaign by that golden spear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or reckon every head Marphisa left</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Divided by her horrid sword, or cleft?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>As when benigner winds more swiftly blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Apennine his shaggy back lays bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two turbid torrents with like fury flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, in their fall, two separate channels wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uproot hard rocks, and mighty trees which grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On their steep banks, and field and harvest bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the vale, and seem as if they vied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which should do mightiest damage on its side:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>So those high-minded virgin warriors two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scowering the field in separate courses, made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Huge havock of the Moors; whom they pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One with couched lance, and one with lifted blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hardly King Agramant his Africk crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From flight, beneath his royal banners stayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In search of Rodomont, he vainly turned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor tidings of the missing warrior learned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>He at his exhortation (so he trowed)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had broke the treaty made in solemn wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To witness which the gods were called aloud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who then so quick vanished from his eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor sees he King Sobrino; disavowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By King Sobrino is the deed, who flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Arles, and deems that day some vengeance dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will fall on Agramant’s devoted head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Marsilius too is fled into the town:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So has that monarch holy faith at heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis hence, that feebly King Troyano’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resists the crew, that war on Charles’s part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Italians, English, Germans; of renown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are all; and, scattered upon every part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are mixed the paladins, those barons bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Glittering like jewels on a cloth of gold;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And, with those peers, is more than one confest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As perfect as is earthly cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guide the savage, that intrepid breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those two famous sons of Olivier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will not now repeat what I exprest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that fierce, daring female twain whilere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who on the field so many Moors extend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No number is there to the slain or end.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>But, putting this affray some while aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without a pinnace will I pass the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To them of France so fast I am not tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that Astolpho should remembered be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the grace given him by his holy guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I told erewhile, and told (it seems to me)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Branzardo and the king of Algaziers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the duke had mustered all their spears.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>Such as the monarchs could in haste engage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raked from all Africa, that host contained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether of fitting or of feeble age:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarce from impressing women they refrained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved his thirst of vengeance to assuage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agramant twice his Africa had drained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Few people in the land were left, and they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A feeble and dispirited array.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>So proved they; for the foe was scarce in view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before that levy broke in panic dread:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like sheep, their quailing bands Astolpho slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charging at his more martial squadrons’ head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the slain filled all that champaign; few</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into Biserta from the carnage fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A prisoner valiant Bucifar remained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The town in safety King Branzardo gained;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>More grieved as Bucifaro’s loss alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than had he lost the rest in arms arrayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wide and in want of ramparts is the town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these could ill be raised without his aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While fain to ransom him, he thinks upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The means, and stands afflicted and dismayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He recollects him how the paladin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dudon, has many a month his prisoner been.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Him under Monaco, upon the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his first passage, Sarza’s monarch took.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thenceforth had been a prisoner evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dudon, who was derived of Danish stock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paladin against the royal Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Branzardo thought, in this distress, to truck;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knowing through sure spy, Astolpho led</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Nubians, to that chief the offer sped.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>A paladin himself, Astolpho knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He gladly ought a paladin to free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when that case the Moorish envoy shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To King Branzardo’s offer does agree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dudon from prison loosed, his thanks bestows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whatsoe’er pertains to land or sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bestirs him to accomplish, in accord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his illustrious chief, the English lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Astolpho leading such a countless band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As might have well seven Africas opprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And recollecting ’twas the saint’s command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who upon him whilere imposed the quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That fair Provence and Aquamorta’s strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from the reaving Saracen should wrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made through his numerous host a second draught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of such as least inapt for sea he thought;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And filling next as full as they could be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His hands with many different sorts of leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plucked from palm, olive, bay and cedar tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approached the shore, and cast them on the waves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh blessed souls! Oh great felicity!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O grace! which rarely man from God receives;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O strange and wondrous miracle, which sprung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of those leaves upon the waters flung!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>They wax in number beyond all esteem;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Becoming crooked and heavy, long, and wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into hard timber turn and solid beam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The slender veins that branch on either side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Taper the masts; and, moored in the salt stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All in a thought transformed to vessels, ride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of as diverse qualities appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As are the plants, whereon they grew whilere.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>It was a miracle to see them grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To galliot, galley, frigate ship, and boat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wondrous, that they with tackling of their own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are found as well as any barks afloat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor lack there men to govern them, when blown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By blustering winds⁠—from islands not remote⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sardinia or Corsica, of every rate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pilot and patron, mariner and mate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Twenty-six thousand were the troop that manned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those ready barks of every sort and kind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Dudon’s government, by sea or land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A leader sage, the navy was consigned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which yet lay anchored off the Moorish strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Expecting a more favourable wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To put to sea; when, freighted with a load</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of prisoners, lo! a vessel made the road.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>She carried those, whom at the bridge of dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—On that so narrow place of battle met⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont took, as often has been said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The valiant Olivier was of the set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando’s kin, and, with them, prisoners led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were faithful Brandimart and Sansonet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With more; to tell whereof there is no need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of German, Gascon, or Italian seed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The patron, yet unweeting he should find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foes in the port, here entered to unload;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having left Argier many miles behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he was minded to have made abode;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because a boisterous, overblowing, wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had driven his bark beyond her destined road;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming himself as safe and welcome guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Progne, when she seeks her noisy nest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>But when, arrived, the imperial eagle spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pards and golden lilies he descries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With countenance as sicklied o’er by dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He stands, as one that in unwary guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has chanced on fell and poisonous snake to tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, in the grass, opprest with slumber lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, pale and startled, hastens to retire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From that ill reptile, swoln with bane and ire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But no retreat from peril is there here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can the patron keep his prisoners down:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him thither Brandimart and Olivier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sansonet and those others drag, where known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And greeted are the friends with joyful cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By England’s duke and Danish Ogier’s son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who read that he who brought them to that shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should for his pains be sentenced to the oar.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>King Otho’s son kind welcome did afford</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unto those Christian cavaliers, as said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who⁠—honoured at his hospitable board⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With arms and all things needful were purveyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His going, for their sake, the Danish lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deferred, who deemed his voyage well delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To parley with those peers, though at the cost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of one or two good days, in harbour lost.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Of Charles, and in what state, what order are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The affairs of France they gave advices true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Told where he best could disembark, and where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To most advantage of the Christian crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While so the cavaliers their news declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A noise is heard; which ever louder grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Followed by such a fierce alarm withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to more fears than one gave rise in all.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The duke Astolpho and the goodly throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in discourse with him were occupied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed in a moment, on their coursers sprung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hurried where the Nubians loudest cried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seeking wherefore that wide larum rung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now here, now there⁠—those warlike lords espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A savage man, and one so strong of hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Naked and sole he troubled all that band.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The naked savage whirled a sapling round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So hard, so heavy, and so strong of grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That every time the weapon went to ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some warrior, more than maimed, opprest the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above a hundred dead are strewed around;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor more defence the routed hands maintain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save that a war of distant parts they try;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For there is none will wait the champion nigh.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Astolpho, Brandimart, the Danish knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hastening towards that noise with Olivier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remain astounded at the wondrous might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And courage, which in that wild man appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, posting thither on a palfry light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is seen a damsel, clad in sable gear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Brandimart in haste that lady goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And both her arms about the warrior throws.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>This was fair Flordelice, whose bosom so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Burned with the love of Monodantes’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, when she left him prisoner to his foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At that streight bridge, had nigh distracted gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From France had she past hither⁠—given to know⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By that proud paynim, who the deed had done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How Brandimart, with many cavaliers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was prisoner in the city of Algiers.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>When now she for that harbour would have weighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An eastern vessel in Marseilles she found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which thither had an ancient knight conveyed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Monodantes’ household; a long round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek his Brandimart that lord had made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By sea, and upon many a distant ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he, upon his way, had heard it told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How he in France should find the warrior bold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>She knowing old Bardino in that wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bardino who from Monodantes’ court</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With little Brandimart had taken flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And reared his nursling in THE SYLVAN FORT;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then hearing what had thither brought the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her had made him loosen from the port;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Relating to that elder, by what chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brandimart had to Africk passed from France.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>As soon as landed, that Biserta lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besieged by good Astolpho’s band, they hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Brandimart is with him in the emprize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They learn, but learn not as a matter clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now in such haste to him the damsel flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When she beholds her faithful cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As plainly shows her joy; which woes o’erblown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had made the mightiest she had ever known.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The gentle baron no less gladly eyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His faithful and beloved consort’s face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her whom he prized above all things beside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And clipt and welcomed her with loving grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor his warm wishes would have satisfied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A first, a second, or a third embrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that he spied Bardino, he that came</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From France, together with that faithful dame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>He stretched his arms, and would embrace the knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And⁠—wherefore he was come⁠—would bid him say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But was prevented by the sudden flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the sacred host, which fled in disarray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the club of that mad, naked wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with the brandished sapling cleared his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flordelice viewed the furious man in front;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cried to Brandimart, “Behold the count!”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>At the same time, withal, Astolpho bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That this was good Orlando plainly knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By signs, whereof those ancient saints had told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the earthly paradise, as tokens true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None of those others, who the knight behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The courteous baron in the madman view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That from long self-neglect, while wild he ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had in his visage more of beast than man.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>With breast and heart transfixed with pity, cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Valiant Astolpho⁠—bathed with many a tear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turning to Danish Dudon, at this side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And afterwards to valiant Olivier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Behold Orlando!” Him awhile they eyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Straining their eyes and lids; then knew the peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, seeing him in such a piteous plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were filled with grief and wonder at the sight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>So grieve and so lament the greater part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those good warriors, that their eyes o’erflow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“ ’Tis time” (Astolpho cried) “to find some art</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To heal him, not indulge in useless woe”;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from his courser sprang: bold Brandimart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olivier, Sansonet and Dudon so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All leap to ground, and all together make</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At Roland, whom the warriors fain would take.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Seeing the circle round about him grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Levels his club that furious paladin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And makes fierce Dudon feel (who⁠—couched below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His buckler⁠—on the madman would break in)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How grievous is that staff’s descending blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And but that Olivier, Orlando’s kin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Broke in some sort its force, that stake accurst</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had shield and helmet, head and body burst.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>It only burst the shield, and in such thunder</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Broke on the casque, that Dudon prest the shore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that, Sir Sansonet cut clean asunder</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sapling, shorn of two cloth-yards and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So vigorous was that warrior’s stroke, while under</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His bosom, Brandimart girt Roland sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sinewy arms about his body flung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the champion’s legs Astolpho clung.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando shook himself, and England’s knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ten paces off, reversed upon the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet loosed not Brandimart, who with more might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And better hold had clasped the madman round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Olivier, too forward in that fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He dealt so furious and so fell a wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his clenched fist, that pale the marquis fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And purple streams from eyes and nostrils well;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>And save his morion had been more than good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bold Olivier had breathed his last, who lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So battered with his fall, it seemed he wou’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bequeath his parting soul to paradise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho and Dudon, that again upstood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Albeit swoln were Dudon’s face and eyes)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Sansonet, who plied so well his sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All made together at Anglantes’ lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>Dudon Orlando from behind embraced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with his foot the furious peer would throw:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho and others seize his arms; but waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their strength in all attempts to hold the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He who has seen a bull, by mastiffs chased</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That gore his bleeding ears, in fury lowe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dragging the dogs that bait him there and here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet from their tusks unable to get clear;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Let him imagine, so Orlando drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho and those banded knights along.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile upstarted Oliviero, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By that fell fistycuff on earth was flung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, seeing they could ill by Roland do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That sought by good Astolpho and his throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He meditates, and compasses, a way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The frantic paladin on earth to lay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>He many a hawser made them thither bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And running knots in them he quickly tied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which on the count’s waist, arms, and legs, they fling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then, among themselves, the ends divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conveyed to this or that amid the ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Compassing Roland upon every side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warriors thus Orlando flung parforce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As farrier throws the struggling ox or horse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>As soon as down, they all upon him are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hands and feet more tightly they constrain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He shakes himself, and plunges here and there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all his efforts for relief are vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho bade them hence the prisoner bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he would heal (he said) the warrior’s brain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shouldered by sturdy Dudon is the load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the beach’s furthest brink bestowed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Seven times Astolpho makes them wash the knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seven times plunged beneath the brine he goes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that they cleanse away the scurf and blight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to his stupid limbs and visage grows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This done, with herbs, for that occasion dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They stop his mouth, wherewith he puffs and blows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, save his nostrils, would Astolpho leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No passage whence the count might air receive.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Valiant Astolpho had prepared the vase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein Orlando’s senses were contained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to his nostrils in such mode conveys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, drawing-in his breath, the county drained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mystic cup withal. Oh wondrous case!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The unsettled mind its ancient seat regained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in its glorious reasonings, yet more clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lucid waxed his wisdom than whilere.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As one, that seems in troubled sleep to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abominable shapes, a horrid crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Monsters which are not, and which cannot be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or seems some strange, unlawful thing to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet marvels at himself, from slumber free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When his recovered senses play him true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So good Orlando, when he is made sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remains yet full of wonder, and astound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Aldabelle’s brother, Monodantes’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him that on his brain such cure had wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He wondering marked, but word he spake to none;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when and how he was brought thither, thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He turned his restless eyes now up now down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor where he was withal, imagined aught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marvelling why he there was naked cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wherefore tethered, neck and heels, so fast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>Then said, as erst Silenus said⁠—when seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And taken sleeping the cave of yore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">SOLVITE ME, with visage so serene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With look so much less wayward than before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That him they from his bonds delivered clean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And raiment to the naked warrior bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All comforting their friend, with grief opprest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that delusion which had him possest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>When to his former self he was recovered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of wiser and of manlier mind than e’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From love as well was freed the enamoured lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she, so gentle deemed, so fair whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by renowned Orlando so adored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did but to him a worthless thing appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What he through love had lost, to reacquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was his whole study, was his whole desire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile Bardino told to Brandimart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How Monodantes, his good sire, was dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, on his brother, Gigliantes’ part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To call him to his kingdom had he sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well as from those isles, which most apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From other lands, in eastern seas are spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That prince’s fair inheritance; than which</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was none more pleasant, populous, or rich.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He said, mid many reasons which he prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That home was sweet, and⁠—were the warrior fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To taste that sweet⁠—he ever would detest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A wandering life; and Brandimart again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Replies, through all that war, he will not rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From serving Roland and King Charlemagne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And after, if he lives to see its end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his own matters better will attend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Upon the following day, for Provence steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The shipping under Danish Dudon’s care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When with the duke retired Anglantes’ peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And heard that lord the warfare’s state declare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then prest with siege Biserta, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But let good England’s knight the honour wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of every vantage; while Astolpho still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all was guided by Orlando’s will.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>The order taken to attack the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of huge Biserta, when, and on what side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How, at the first assault, the walls are won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with Orlando who the palm divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lament not that I now shall leave unshown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since for short time I lay my tale aside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the meanwhile, how fierce an overthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moors received in France, be pleased to know.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Well nigh abandoned was their royal lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his worst peril; for to Arles again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had gone, with many of the paynim horde,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sage Sobrino and the king of Spain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, for the deemed the land unsafe, aboard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their barks sought refuge, with a numerous train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Barons and cavaliers, that served the Moor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who moved by their example put from shore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet royal Agramant the fight maintains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when he can no longer make a stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turns from the combat, and directly strains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Arles, not far remote, upon the strand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him Rabican pursues, with flowing reins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom Aymon’s daughter drives with heel and hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him would she slay, through whom so often crost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That martial maid had her Rogero lost.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa by the same desire was stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had her thoughts on tardy vengeance placed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For her dead sire; and as she fiercely spurred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made her hot courser feel his rider’s haste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But neither martial maid, amid that herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of flying Moors, so well the monarch chased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to o’ertake him in his swift retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First into Arles, and then aboard his fleet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>As two fair generous pards, that from some crag</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together dart, and stretch across the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When they perceive that vigorous goat or stag,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their nimble quarry, is pursued in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if ashamed they in that chase did lag,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return repentant and in high disdain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, with a sigh, return those damsels two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When they the paynim king in safety view:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet therefore halt not, but in fury go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid that crowd, which flies, possest with dread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feeling, now here, now there, at every blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many that never more uprear their head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To evil pass was brought the broken foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For safety was not even for them that fled:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since Agramant, a sure retreat to gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bade shut the city-gate which faced the plain;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>And bade on Rhone break all the bridges down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unhappy people, ever held as cheap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Weighed with the tyrant’s want who wears a crown⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As worthless herd of goats or silly sheep!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These in the sea, those in the river drown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those with blood the thirsty fallows steep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Franks few prisoners made, and many slew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ransom in that battle was for few.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Of the great multitude of either train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Christened or paynim, killed in that last fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though in unequal parts (for, of the slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By far more Saracens were killed in flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By hands of those redoubted damsels twain),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Signs even to this day remain in sight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, hard by Arles, where sleeps the lazy Rhone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The plain with rising sepulchres is strown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile his heavy ships of deepest draught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Agramant had made put forth to sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving some barks in port⁠—his lightest craft⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For them that would aboard his navy flee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He stays two days, while they the stragglers waft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for the winds are wild and contrary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the third day, to sail he give command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In trust to make return to Africk’s land.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Royal Marsilius, in that fatal hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fearing the costs will fall upon his Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that the clouds, which big with tempest lower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the end will burst upon his fields and grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes for Valentia; where he town and tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Begins to fortify with mickle pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for that war prepares, which after ends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the destruction of himself and friends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>King Agramant his sails for Africk bent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His barks ill-armed and almost empty go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Empty of men, but full of discontent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that three-fourths had perished by the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As cruel some, as weak and proud some shent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their king, and (as still happens in like woe)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All hate him privily; but, for they fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His fury, in his presence mute appear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet sometimes two or three their lips unclose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Some knot of friends, where each on each relies⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And their pent choler and their rage expose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet Agramant beneath the illusion lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That each will love and pity overflows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this befalls, because he still espies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">False faces, hears but voices that applaud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And nought but adulation, lies and fraud.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Not in Biserta’s port his host to land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was the sage king of Africa’s intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had sure news that shore by Nubia’s band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was held, but he so far above it meant</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To steer his Moorish squadron, that the strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should not be steep or rugged for descent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There would he disembark, and thence would aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith his people, broken and dismaid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But favoured not by his foul destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was that intention, provident and wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which willed the fleet, from leaves of greenwood tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Produced upon the beach in wondrous guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, bound for France, now ploughed the foaming sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should meet the king at night; that from surprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that dark, dismal hour, amid his crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worse panic and disorder might ensue.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Not yet to him have tidings been conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That squadrons of such force the billows plow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would he have believed in him who said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hundred barks had sprung from one small bough;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence for Africa the king had weighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not fearing to encounter hostile prow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor has he watchmen in his tops to spy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make report of what they hence descry.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>’Twas so those ships, by England’s peer supplied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Dudon, manned with good and armed crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which see that Moorish fleet at eventide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that strange armament forthwith pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assailed them unawares, and, far, and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among those barks their grappling-irons threw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And linked by chains, to their opponents clung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When known for Moors and foemen by their tongue.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>In bearing down, impelled by winds that blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Propitious to the Danish chief’s intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those weighty ships so shocked the paynim foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That many vessels to the bottom went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, taxing wits and hands, to work them woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Them with fire, sword, and stones the Christians shent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which on their ships in such wide ruin pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like tempest never vext the sea before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Bold Dudon’s men, to whom unwonted might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And daring was imparted from on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Since the hour was come the paynims to requite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For more than one ill deed,) from far and nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moors so pestilently gall and smite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agramant finds no shelter; from the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above, thick clouds of whistling arrows strike;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Around gleam hook and hatchet, sword and pike.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The king hears huge and heavy stones descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From charged machine or thundering engine sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, falling, poop and prow and broadside rend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Opening to ravening seas a mighty vent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more than all the furious fires offend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fires that are quickly kindled, slowly spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wretched crews would fain that danger shun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ever into direr peril run.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>One headlong plunged, pursued by fire and sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And perished mid the waters, one who wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faster with arms and feet, his passage oared</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To other barque, already overfraught:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But she repulsed the wretch that fain would board;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose hand, which too importunately sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To clamber, grasped the side, while his lopt arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And body stained the wave with life-blood warm.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Him, that to save his life i’ the waters thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or, at the worst, to perish with less pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Since swimming profited the caitiff nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he perceived his strength and courage drain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the hungry fires from which the refuge sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fear of drowning hurries back again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He grasps a burning plank, and in the dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of dying either death, by both is sped.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>This vainly to the sea resorts, whom spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or hatchet, brandished close at hand, dismay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For stone or arrow following in his rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Permit the craven to make little way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But haply, while it yet delights your ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twere well and wisely done to end my lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than harp upon the theme so long</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to annoy you with a tedious song.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
