<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>So far Orlando wends, he comes to where</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He of old Proteus’ hears the cruel use</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But feels such pity for Olympia fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wronged by Cymosco, who in prison mews</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her plighted spouse, that ere he makes repair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Further, he gives her hope to venge the abuse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He does so, and departs; and with his spouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departs Bireno, to repeat his vows.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>What cannot, when he has a heart possess’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This false and cruel traitor Love? since he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can banish from Orlando’s faithful breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such tried allegiance and due loyalty?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wise, full of all regards, and of the blest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And glorious church the champion wont to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, little for himself or uncle, driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By a vain love, he cares, and less for heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>But I excuse him well, rejoiced to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I have like partner in my vice: for still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek my good I too am faint and slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But sound and nimble in pursuit of ill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The count departs, disguised in sable show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor for so many friends, with froward will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deserted cares; and comes where on the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are camped the hosts of Afric and of Spain;</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Rather uncamped: for, in less troops or more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rains under shed and tree had driven the band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here ten, there twenty, seven or eight, or four,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Near or further off, Orlando scanned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each sleeps, oppressed with toil and wearied sore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This stretched on earth, that propped upon his hand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They sleep, and many might the count have slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet never bared his puissant Durindane.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-120" id="noteref-120" epub:type="noteref">120</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>So generous is Orlando’s heart, he base</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteems it were to smite a sleeping foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now this he seeks, and now that other place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet cannot track his lady, high or low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he finds any one in waking case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sighing, to him he paints her form and show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then prays him that for courtesy, he where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel is, will reach him to repair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>And when the day its shining light displayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He wholly searched the Moorish army through.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that the gentle warrior was arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Arab weeds, he this might safely do;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of his purpose came alike in aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That other tongues beside the French he knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the African so well was read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He seemed in Tripoly one born and bred:</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>He sojourns there three days, the camp to see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still seeking nought beside: next up and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within, without, both burgh and city he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spies; nor surveys the realm of France alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But fair Auvergne, and even Gascony</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Revisits, to its farthest little town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roves from Provence to Brittany’s domain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the Picards to the bounds of Spain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>Between October and November’s moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that dull season when the leafy vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is stript from trembling plant, whose limbs are shown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all their mantling foliage dispossess’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in close flights the swarming birds are flown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando enters on his amorous quest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This he pursues the livelong winter through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor quits when gladsome spring returns anew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As (such his wont) from land to land he goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A river’s side he reaches on a day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to the neighbouring sea in quiet flows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bretons and Normans parting on its way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, swoln with mountain rain and melted snows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then thundered, white with foam and flashing-spray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with impetuous stream had overtopt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its brim, and burst the bridge, and passage stopt.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>The paladin this bank and the other eyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Along the river’s channel, to explore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since neither fish nor fowl, if from his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He could gain footing on the adverse shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, with a damsel in the poop, he spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A ready pinnace that towards him bore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She steered, as if she would approach the strand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But would not let her shallop make the land.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>Steered not to land; as haply with suspicion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take a lading, in her own despite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her the good Orlando made petition</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To put him o’er the stream; and she: “No knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Passes this ferry, but upon condition</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He shall his faith and promise duly plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he will do a battle, at my prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the justest quarrel and most fair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>“So that if thou on that other shore to land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dost by my aid, Sir cavalier, desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Promise me, ere the month which is at hand”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(The damsel so pursued her speech) “expire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou wilt join the Hibernian monarch’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who forms a fair armada, in his ire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sack Ebuda’s isle; of all compress’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By ocean’s circling waves, the cruellest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Know, beyond Ireland, in the briny flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An island, amid many others, lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ebuda is its name; whose people rude</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Such is their law), in search of plunder hies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the women that it takes, for food</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a voracious animal supplies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which every day to shore for this does speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And finds new wife or maid whereon to feed:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“For of these merchant still and Corsair sell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A large supply, and most of those most fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reckoning one slain a-day, you thus may well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Compute what wives and maids have perished there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if compassion in your bosom dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor you to Love an utter rebel are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be you contented with this band to wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">United for such profitable end.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>To hear the whole Orlando scarce could bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere to be first in that emprize he swore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-121" id="noteref-121" epub:type="noteref">121</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As one who evil deed misliked to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with impatience like relation bore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence first induced to think, and next to fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica is captive on that shore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since he so long the missing maid pursues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor of the damsel yet can gather news.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>Breaking his every scheme, this phantasy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The troubled cavalier did so confound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That will all speed to that fell island he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved to navigate; nor yet the round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a new sun was buried in the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere he a vessel at <abbr>St.</abbr> Malo’s found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In which, embarking on his quest, the count</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Put forth, and cleared that night <abbr>St.</abbr> Michael’s Mount.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-122" id="noteref-122" epub:type="noteref">122</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Breac and Landriglier<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-123" id="noteref-123" epub:type="noteref">123</a> past on the left hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando’s vessel skims the Breton shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then shapes her course towards the chalky strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence England’s isle the name of Albion bore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the south wind, which had her canvas fanned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shifts to north-west, and freshening, blows so sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mariners are fain to strike all sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wear and scud before the boisterous gale.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>A distance traversed in four days, in one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Backwards the ceaseless wind the frigate bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The helmsman kept the sea, lest she should run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aground, and break like glass upon the shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wind upon the fifth day changed its tune,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So loud and furious through the other four;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let, without more strife, the vessel gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A port, where Antwerp’s river met the main.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As soon as harboured there in shattered plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The weary mariners their frigate moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of a city, seated on the right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that fair stream, descends upon the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As his gray hairs may warrant him, a wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stricken in years; who, full of courteous lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turns to the county, after greetings due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reputing him the leader of that crew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And prays him, on a damsel’s part, “that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her would think not irksome to repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom of unequalled affability</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sweetness, he would find, as well as fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or otherwise would be content, that she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should to his bark resort, to seek him there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor prove less pliant than had been before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All the knights errant, who had sought that shore:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>“For hitherto, by land or sea conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No cavalier had journeyed to that place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That had refused to parlay with the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And give her counsel in a cruel case.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando, hearing this, no more delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But issued from the bark with hurried pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in all kind and courteous usage bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His way directed where the ancient led.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>With him did Roland to the city go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at the bottom of a palace-stair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conducted by that elder, full of woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lady found, if face may grief declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sable cloth, with which (a mournful show)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chamber, and hall, and gallery, furnished were;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, after honourable welcome paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seated the paladin, and sadly said.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The daughter of the Count of Holland,” (cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Lady) “know in me, Sir cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though not his only offspring (for beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Myself two brothers were) to him so dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, for whatever favour I applied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I never met refusal from the peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I living glady in this happy sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A duke by chance was guested at our court;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The Duke of Zealand, meaning for Biscay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With purpose there to war upon the Moor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His youth and beauty, then in manhood’s May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And force of love, unfelt by me before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made me, with little strife, his easy prey:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Persuaded by his outward cheer yet more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I thought, and think, and still shall think, the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loved me, and loves me yet with heart sincere.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Those days, whenas the wind was contrary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Which fair for me, if foul for others blew)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To others forty seemed, an hour to me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So upon speedy wings the moments flew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while, we oftentimes held colloquy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, to be given with solemn right and due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I promised him, and he to me, his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On his return, in wedlock’s holy band.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Bireno hardly from our court was gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such the name my faithful lover bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Friesland’s king, whose realm is from our own</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No further than this stream from Ocean’s shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Designing to bestow me on his son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arbantes hight (the monarch had no more),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Holland sent the worthiest of his land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me of the count, my father, to demand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“I without power to falsify that vow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to my gentle lover I had plight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor though I had the power, would Love allow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me so to play the ingrate, if I might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(The treaty, well on foot, to overthrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And nigh concluded) with afflicted sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cried <q>to my father, I would rather shed</q></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><q>My very life-blood, than in Friesland wed</q>.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“My gracious father, he who took but pleasure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In what pleased me, nor would my will constrain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marking my grief, broke off the intended measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To give me comfort and relieve my pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At this proud Friesland’s sovereign such displeasure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conceived, and entertained such high disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He entered Holland, and the war began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In which my kin were slaughtered to a man.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Besides, that both his puissance and his might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are such, as in our age are matched of few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such is in evil deeds his cunning sleight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He laughs to scorn what wit and force can do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strange arms he bears, unknown to any wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save him, of the ancient nations or the new:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hollow iron, two yards long, whose small</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Channel he loads with powder and a ball.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“He, where ’tis closed behind, in the iron round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Touches with fire a vent, discerned with pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In guise that skilful surgeon tries his ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where need requires that he should breathe a vein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence flies the bullet with such deafening sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That bolt and lightening from the hollow cane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appear to dart, and like the passing thunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Burn what they smite, beat-down or rend asunder.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Twice broken, he our armies overthrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this device, my gentle brethren slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first the shot in our first battle slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reaching his heart, through broken plate and chain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other in the other onset, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was flying from the fatal field in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ball his shoulder from a distance tore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind, and issued from his breast before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“My father next, defending on a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The only fortress which he still possessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The others taken which about it lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was sent alike to his eternal rest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who going and returning, to purvey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What lacked, as this or that occasion pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was aimed at from afar, in privy wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the traytour struck between the eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And I remaining, sire and brethren dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The isle of Holland’s only heir, the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Friesland, who by the desire was led</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of better there his power establishing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To me, and also to my people said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I peace and quiet to my state might bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would I (when I before would not accord)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now take his son Arbantes for my lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“I, not so much for deadly hate I bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him and all his kindred, by whose spite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My sire and both my brothers slaughtered were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My country sacked and waste, as that the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I would not wrong, to whom I fealty sware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had my solemn word already plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That me to wedlock man should woo in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he to Holland should return from Spain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“For one ill-born, a hundred yet behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will bear (replied) to hazard all content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Slain, burnt alive, to let them to the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scatter my ashes, rather than consent.—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My people seek to move my stedfast mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By prayer and by protest, from this intent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And threat to yield my city up and me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest all be lost through my obduracy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“When in my fixt and firm resolve they read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That prayer and protest are alike in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My town and me, with Friesland’s king agreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surrendered, as they vowed, my vassal train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not doing by me any shameful deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me he assured of life and of domain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So I would soften my obdurate mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be to wed with his Arbantes wooed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“I who would have consented to forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My life to scape from him, reflection made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, save I first avenged myself, all woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Endured, would be by this regret outweighed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Long time I muse, and to my misery know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis only simulation which can aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not simple willingness, I feign desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To win his grace, and have him for my sire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Mid many in my father’s service, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Select two brothers fitted for my view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of valiant heart and great ability</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But more approved for truth, as followers, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bred in my father’s court, from infancy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had with myself grown up; the brothers two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So wholly bound to me, they would have thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My safety with their lives was cheaply bought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“To them I tell my project, and the pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of brethren promise me their faithful aid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Flanders this, a pinnace to prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I sent, and that with me in Holland stayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, while both foreigners and natives were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Friesland’s kingdom, to our nuptials prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bireno in Biscay (the tidings went)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Holland had equipt an armament.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Since on the issue of the earliest fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When in the rout one hapless brother fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I had dispatched a courier to Biscay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who the sad news should to Bireno tell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While he toils sore his squadron to array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proud Friesland’s arms our wretched remnant quell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bireno, who knew nought of this, had weighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with his barks put forth to bring us aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>“These tidings told to Friesland’s monarch, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Confiding to his son the wedding’s care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To meet Bireno’s squadron puts to sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (so chance willed) burns, sinks, or routs them there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leading him off into captivity;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But none to us as yet the tidings bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while I to the amorous youth am wed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, when the sun sought <em>his</em>, would seek <em>my</em> bed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Behind the curtains, I had hid the tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And faithful follower, of whom I said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who moved not till the bridegroom he descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet waited not till he in bed was laid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But raised a hatchet, and so well applied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind the stripling’s head the ponderous blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of speech and life it reft him; I, who note</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The deed, leap lightly up and cut his throat.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-124" id="noteref-124" epub:type="noteref">124</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>“As falls the bullock upon shamble-sill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus fell the ill-starred stripling, in despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of king Cymosco, worst among the ill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So was the impious king of Friesland hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who did my brothers and my father kill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in my state to found a better right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In wedlock wished to join me with his son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply to slay me when his end was won.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Ere new disturbance interrupt the deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Taking what costliest was and lightest weighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me my companion by a chord, with speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drops from a window, where with boat purveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Flanders (as related) for my need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His brother, watchful of our motions, stayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We dip the oar, we loose the sail, and driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By both, escape, as was the will of Heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“The daring feat achieved, I cannot say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If Friesland’s king more sorrowed for his son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or raged at me: he there arrived, the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ensuing, where the dreadful deed was done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proud he returned, both he and his array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the duke taken, and the victory won:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thought to feast and nuptials he was bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But in his home all grief and darkness found.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>“His pity for his son, the hate he fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards me, torment the father day and night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But as lamenting will not raise the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vengeance is a vent for smothered spite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That portion of his thoughts, which should have led</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king, to ease by sighs his troubled sprite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now willingly takes counsel with his hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seize me, and his vengeance satiate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“All known or said to by my friends, or who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were friends of those that, chosen from my train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had aided me the deadly deed to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their goods and chattels burnt, were doomed or slain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he had killed Bireno, since he knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No other trouble could inflict such pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that he, saving him in malice, thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had a net wherewith I might be caught.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Yet him a cruel proposition made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Granting a year his purpose to complete;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Condemned to privy death, till then delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save in that time, through force or through deceit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He by his friends’ and kindred’s utmost aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doing or plotting, me from my retreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conveyed into his prisons; so that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can only saved by my destruction be.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“What for his safety could be done, behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Short of my own destruction, had been tried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Six towns I had in Flanders: these I sold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (great or small the produce set aside)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A part of it, to wily persons told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it to tempt his guards might be applied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest of it dispensed to move and arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Germans or English, to the miscreant’s harm.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“My agents, whether they their trust betrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or that they could in truth perform no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me with vain words instead of help have paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scorn me, having drained my scanty store:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now the term is nigh expired, when aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether of open force or treasured ore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No longer will arrive in time to save</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My cherished spouse from torture and the grave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>“Through him, from me was my dominion rent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through him, my father and my brethren slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through him, the little treasure left me, spent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(What served alone existence to sustain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rescue him, in cruel durance pent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor other means to succour him remain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save I, to liberate him from prison, go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yield myself to such a cruel foe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>“If nothing more be left me then to try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor other way for his escape appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than <em>his</em> with this <em>my</em> wretched life to buy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This life I gladly will lay down: one fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone molests me; and it is that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can never my conditions make so clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to assure me, that with new deceit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me, when his prey, the tyrant will not cheat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>“I fear, when I shall be in captive plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he has put all tortures upon me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He may not loose Bireno, and the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have not to thank me for his liberty:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like perjured king, and full of foul despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with my murder will not satiate be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But by Bireno neither less nor more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will do, than he had done by me before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The occasion now that I confer with you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tell my case to all who seek the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both lords and knights, is with the single view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That taking counsel of so large a band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some one may indicate assurance due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That when before the cruel king I stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No longer he Bireno shall detain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, after I am killed, the duke be slain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Warrior to went with me, I in my need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When I shall be to Friesland given, have prayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But so he promise, that the exchange agreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall be between us in such manner made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That from his bonds Bireno shall be freed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When I am to the monarch’s hands conveyed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus I, when I am slain, shall die content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to my spouse shall life by death have lent:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Not to this day have chanced upon a wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who on his faith will give me warranty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That if the king refuse to loose the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When I am offered, from captivity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will not suffer that in my despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So feared those weapons!) I shall taken be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So feared those weapons, upon every hand!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, howsoever thick, no plates withstand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Now, if as strong Herculean port and bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appear to vouch, such worth to you belong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And you believe to give me or withhold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is in your power, should he intend me wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be with me, when committed to his hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since I shall fear not, in your convoy strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When you are with me, that my lord, though I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be after slain, shall by his order die.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Here her discourse, wherewith were interposed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loud sobs, the lady ceased, and silent stood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando, when her lips the damsel closed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose ready will ne’er halts in doing good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Briefly to her replies, as indisposed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To idle speeches of his natural mood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But plights his solemn word, that better aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She should from him receive than that she prayed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>’Tis not his scheme to place her in the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of her foul foe, to have Bireno freed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will save both the lovers, if his brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wonted valour fail him not at need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embarked that very day, they put from land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a clear sky and prosperous wind to speed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The county hastes in his impatient heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eager to reach that isle, the monster’s seat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Through the still deeps, on this or the other side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The skipper veered his canvas to the wind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This isle, and that of Zealand, they descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One seen before, and one shut in behind.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-125" id="noteref-125" epub:type="noteref">125</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The third day, from the harboured vessel’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Holland, Roland disembarks, not joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the complaining dame; whom to descend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will not till she hear that tyrant’s end.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>Armed at all points, the county passed ashore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Borne on a horse ’twixt brown and black, the breed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Denmark, but in Flanders nurtured, more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteemed for weight and puissance than for speed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For when the paladin embarked before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Brittany he left the gallant steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His Brigliador; so nimble and so fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That but Bayardo could with him compare.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando fares to Dordrecht, where he views</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A numerous squadron, which the gate maintain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well, because suspicion still ensues</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the foundation of a new domain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that before they had received the news,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That out of Zealand, backed with armed train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was coming with a fleet of many sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cousin of the lord here pent in jail.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>One, good Orlando to the monarch’s ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bade bear a message, “that an errant knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh him would prove himself, with sword and spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But would lay down this pact before the fight:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That if the king unhorsed the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her who Arbantes slew, he, as his right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should have, that, at the cavalier’s command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was ready for delivery to his hand;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And willed the king should on his side agree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If him the knight in combat overbore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith released from his captivity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bireno to full freedom to restore.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him the footman does his embassy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he, who knightly worth or courteous lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had never known, directs his whole intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The count by treacherous fraud to circumvent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>He hopes as well, if he the warrior slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To have the dame, whom, so aggrieved, he hates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If in the knight’s disposal, and the say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that strange knight, the footman well relates.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence thirty men dispatched by other way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than to the portal led, where Roland waits;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with a long and privy circuit wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And come upon the paladin behind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>He all this while had made his guard delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight with words, till horse and foot he spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived, where he this ambuscade did lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When from the gate he with as many hied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As is the practised hunter’s wonted way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To circle wood and beasts on every side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As nigh Volana, with his sweeping nets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wary fisher fish and pool besets.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-126" id="noteref-126" epub:type="noteref">126</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>’Tis thus the king bars every path which lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Free for the warrior’s flight, with armed train:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He him alive, and in no other guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would have, and lightly hopes his end to gain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor for the earthly thunderbolt applies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That had so many and so many slain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which here he deems would serve his purpose ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he desires to take and not to kill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>As wary fowler, bent on greater prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wisely preserves alive the game first caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That by the call-bird and his cheating play,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-127" id="noteref-127" epub:type="noteref">127</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More may within the circling net be brought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such cunning art Cymosco would assay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Roland would not be so lightly bought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like them by the first toil that springs betrayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And quickly forced the circle which was made.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Where he perceives the assailants thickest stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He rests his lance, and sticks in his career</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First one and afterwards another, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another, and another, who appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of paste; till six he of the circling band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of foes impales upon a single spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A seventh left out, who by the push is slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since the clogged weapon can no more contain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>No otherwise, upon the further shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fosse or of canal, the frogs we spy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By cautious archer, practised in his lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote and transfixed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-128" id="noteref-128" epub:type="noteref">128</a> the one the other nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the shaft, until it hold no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From barb to feathers full, allowed to lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heavy lance Orlando from him flung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to close combat with his faulchion sprung.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>The lance now broke, his sword the warrior drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That sword which never yet was drawn in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still with cut or thrust some soldier slew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now horse, now footman of the tyrant’s train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, ever where he dealt a stroke, changed blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yellow, green, white and black, to crimson stain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cymosco grieves, when most his need require,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not to have now his hollow cane and fire;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>And with loud voice and menacing command</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bids these be brought, but ill his followers hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For those who have found safety of his band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To issue from the city are in fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, when he sees them fly on either hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would fly as well from that dread cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes for the gate, and would the drawbridge lift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the pursuing county is too swift.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>The monarch turns his back, and leaves the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lord of the drawbridge and of either gate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thanks to his swifter steed, the rest in flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He passes: good Orlando will not wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Intent the felon, not his band, to smite)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the vulgar herd to wreck his hate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But his slow horse seems restive; while the king’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More nimble, flies as if equipt with wings.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>From street to street, before the count he made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vanished clean; but after little stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came with new arms, with tube and fire purveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, at his hest, this while his men convey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And posted at a corner, he waylaid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His foe, as hunter watches for his prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In forest, with armed dogs<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-129" id="noteref-129" epub:type="noteref">129</a> and spear, attending</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The boar in fury from the hill descending,</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Who rends the branch and overthrows the stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wheresoe’er he turns his haughty front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appears (so loud the deafening crash and groan)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if he were uprending wood and mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Intent to make him his bold deed atone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cymosco at the pass expects the count;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as he appears, with ready light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Touches the hole, and fires upon the knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Behind, the weapon flames in lightning’s guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vents the thunder from before; the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shakes under foot and city wall; the skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fearful echo all about rebound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The burning bolt with sudden fury flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not sparing aught which in its course is found.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hissing and whizzing through the skies it went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But smote not, to the assassin’s foul intent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Whether it was his great desire to kill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That baron, or his hurry made him fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or trembling heart, like leaf which flutters still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made hand and arm together flinch and quail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or that it was not the Creator’s will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The church so soon her champion should bewail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The glancing stroke his courser’s belly tore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outstretched on earth, from thence to rise no more.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>To earth fall horse and rider: this the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarce touched; the other thundering pressed the plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the first rose so ready and so light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from the fall seemed breath and force to gain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As African Anteus, in the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rose from the sand with prouder might and main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So when Orlando touched the ground, to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He rose with doubled force and vigour new.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He who has seen the thunder, from on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discharged by Jove with such a horrid sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descend where nitre, coal, and sulphur lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stored up for use in magazine profound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which scarce has reached⁠—but touched it, ere the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is in a flame, as well as burning ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Firm walls are split, and solid marbles riven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And flying stones cast up as high as heaven;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Let him imagine, when from earth he sprung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such was the semblance of the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who moved in mode to frighten Mars among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Gods, so fierce and horrid was his cheer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At this dismay’d, the King of Friesland stung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His horse, and turned his rein, to fly the peer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But fierce Orlando was upon his foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faster than arrow flies from bended bow:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>And, what before he could not, when possest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his good courser, now afoot will do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His speed outgoes all thought in every breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exceeds all credence, save in those who view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tyrant shortly joined, he on the crest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote at his head so well, he cleft it through;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the neck divided by the blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sent it, to shake its last on earth below.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Lo! in the frighted city other sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was heard to rise, and other crash of brands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From troop, who, thither in his guidance bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Followed Bireno’s cousin from his lands:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, since the unguarded gates he open found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the city’s heart had poured his bands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the bold paladin had struck such fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He without let might scour it far and near.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>In rout the people fly, who cannot guess</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who these may be, or what the foes demand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, when this man and that by speech and dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Zealand-men distinguishes the band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Carte blanche they proffer, and the chief address,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bidding him range them under his command;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the Frieslanders to lend him aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who have their duke in loathsome prison stayed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>To Friesland’s king that people hatred bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all his following: who their ancient lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had put to death, and who by them yet more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As evil and rapacious, was abhorred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando interposed with kindly lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As friend of both, the parties to accord:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom, so joined, no Frieslander was left</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But was of life or liberty bereft.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>They would not wait to seek the dungeon-key,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But breaking-down the gate, their entrance made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bireno to the count with courtesy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grateful thanks the service done repaid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence they, together with large company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Went where Olympia in her vessel stayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For so was the expecting lady hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom that island’s crown belonged of right.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>She who had thither good Orlando brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not hoping that he would have thriven so well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Enough for her, if by her misery bought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her spouse were rescued from the tyrant’s cell!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her, full of love and loyal homage, sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The people one and all: ’Twere long to tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How she caressed Bireno, he the maid⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What thanks both lovers to the county paid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The people, throned in her paternal reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Replace the injured dame, and fealty swear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She on the duke, to whom in solid chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love with eternal knot had linked the fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The empire of herself and her domain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conferred: He, called away by other care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left in the cousin’s guardian care this while</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His fortresses, and all the subject isle.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Since he to visit Zealand’s duchy planned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His faithful consort in his company;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thence, upon the king of Friesland’s land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would try his fortune (as he said), for he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A pledge, he rated highly, had in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which seemed of fair success the warranty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The daughter of the king: who here forsaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With many others had been prisoner taken.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>To a younger brother, her, the duke pretends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be conjoined in wedlock, he conveyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Roman senator<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-130" id="noteref-130" epub:type="noteref">130</a> thence parting wends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the very day Bireno weighed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he to nothing else his hand extends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all the many, many prized made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save to that engine, found amid the plunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which in all points I said resembled thunder.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Not with intent, in his defence to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What he had taken, of the prize possest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he still held it an ungenerous care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To go with vantage on whatever quest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with design to cast the weapon where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It never more should living wight molest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, what was appertaining to it, all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bore off as well, the powder and the ball.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>And thus, when of the tidesway he was clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the deepest sea his bark descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that no longer distant signs appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of either shore on this or the other side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He seized the tube, and said: “That cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May never vail through thee his knightly pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor base be rated with a better foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Down with thee to the darkest deep below!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>“O loathed, O cursed piece of enginery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast in Tartarean bottom, by the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Beelzebub, whose foul malignity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ruin of this world through thee has planned!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hell, from whence thou came, I render thee.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So said, he cast away the weapon; fanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile, with flowing sheet, his frigate goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By wind, which for the cruel island blows.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>Such was the paladin’s desire to explore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If in the place his missing lady were;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he prefers the united world before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can an hour of life without her bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fears, if he set foot on Ireland’s shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some other chance may interrupt him there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that he after have in vain to say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Why hasted I no faster on my way?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor he in England nor in Ireland port</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will make, nor on the coast that’s opposite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But let him go, the naked archer’s sport,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore smitten in the heart!⁠—ere I indite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet more of him, to Holland I resort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And you to hear me company invite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For well I wot that you as well as me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twould grieve <em>that</em> bridal should without us be.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Sumptuous and fair the bridal there is made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But neither yet so sumptuous nor so fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As it will be in Zealand, it is said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But ’tis not my design you should repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither; since by new accidents delayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The feast will be, of which be it my care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In other strain, the tidings to report;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If you to hear that other strain resort.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
