<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>CANTO 11</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Assisted by the magic ring she wears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Angelica evanishes from view.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next in a damsel, whom a giant bears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath his arm, his bride Rogero true</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beholds. Orlando to the shore repairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where the fell orc so many damsels slew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Olympia frees, and spoils the beast of life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her afterwards Oberto takes to wife.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Although a feeble rein, in mid career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will oft suffice to stop courageous horse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Tis seldom Reason's bit will serve to steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desire, or turn him from his furious course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When pleasure is in reach: like headstrong bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom from the honeyed meal 'tis ill to force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If once he scent the tempting mess, or sup</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A drop, which hangs upon the luscious cup.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>What reason then Rogero shall withhold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From taking with Angelica delight, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That gentle maid, there naked in his hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the lone forest, and secure from sight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Bradamant he thinks not, who controlled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His bosom erst: and foolish were the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thinking of that damsel as before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By this he had not set an equal store;</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Warmed by whose youthful beauties, the severe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Xenocrates would not have been more chaste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The impatient Child had dropt both shield and spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hurrying now his other arms uncased;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, casting down her eyes in shame and fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The virtuous ring upon her finger placed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica descried, and which of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From her Brunello in Albracca bore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>This is the ring she carried into France,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When thither first the damsel took her way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her the brother, bearer of the lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After, the paladin, Astolpho's prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this she Malagigi's spells and trance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made vain by Merlin's stair; and on a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando freed, with many knights and good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Dragontina's cruel servitude:</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>With this passed viewless from the turret-cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where her that bad old man had mewed; but why</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Recount its different wonders, if as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You know the virtues of the ring as I?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From her this even in her citadel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His monarch Agramant to satisfy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brunello took: since where she had been crost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Fortune, till her native realm was lost.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>Now that she this upon her hand surveys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She is so full of pleasure and surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She doubts it is a dream, and, in amaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hardly believes her very hand and eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then softly to her mouth the hoop conveys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, quicker than the flash which cleaves the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From bold Rogero's sight her beauty shrowds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As disappears the sun, concealed in clouds.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet still Rogero gazed like wight distraught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hurried here and there with fruitless speed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when he had recalled the ring to thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foiled and astounded, cursed his little heed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now the vanished lady, whom he sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that ungrateful and discourteous deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accusing stood, wherewith she had repaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Unfitting recompense) his generous aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Ungrateful damsel! and is this the pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You render for the service done?" (said he)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Why rather would you steal my ring away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than have it as a welcome gift from me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only this, (but use me as you may)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, and my shield and courser, yours shall be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So you no more conceal your beauteous cheer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cruel, though answering not, I know you hear."</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>So saying, like one blind, with bootless care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feeling his way about the fount he strayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How often he embraced the empty air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping in this to have embraced the maid!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile, now far removed, the flying fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had halted not, till to a cave conveyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Formed in a mountain was that harbour rude;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spacious, and for her need supplied with food.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>'Twas here an aged herdsman, one who tended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A numerous troop of mares, had made his won:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These, seeking pasture, through the valley wended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the green grass was fed by freshening run:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While stalls on either side the cave, defended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His charge from the oppressive noon-tide sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica, within, that livelong day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unseen of prying eyes, prolonged her stay;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>And about evening, when refreshed with rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And food, she deemed her course she might renew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In certain rustic weeds her body dressed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How different from those robes of red, or blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Green, yellow, purple, her accustomed vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So various in its fashion, shape, and hue!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet her not so that habit misbecame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that she looked the fair and noble dame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>Then Phillis' and Neaera's praise forbear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ye who sing of Amaryllis cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or flying Galataea, not so fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tityrus and Melibaeus, with your peace!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twas here the beauteous lady took a mare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which liked her best, of all that herd's increase.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, and then first conceived the thought, again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek in the Levant her antient reign.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>This while Rogero, after he had passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long space in hope the maid might re-appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Awakened from his foolish dream at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And found she was not nigh, and did not hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to remount his griffin-courser cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In earth and air accustomed to career.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, having slipt his bit, the winged horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had towered and soared in air a freer course.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>To his first ill addition grave and sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was to have lost the bird of rapid wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he no better than the mockery bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Put on him by the maid; but deeper sting</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than this or that, implants, and pains him more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thought of having lost the precious ring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not for its power so much, esteemed above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its worth, as given him by his lady love.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>Afflicted beyond measure, he, with shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast on his shoulder, and new-cased in mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left the sea-side, and through a grassy field</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursued his way, towards a spacious vale:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he beheld a path, by wood concealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The widest and most beaten in the dale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor far had wound the closest shades within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere on his right he heard a mighty din.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>He heard a din, and fearful clashing sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of arms, and hurrying on with eager pace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twixt tree and tree, two furious champions found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waging fierce fight in close and straightened place:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to each other (warring on what ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not) neither showed regard nor grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The one a giant was of haughty cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one a bold and gallant cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Covered with shield and sword, one, leaping, sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now here now there, and thus himself defended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest a two-handed mace upon his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should fall, with which the giant still offended: —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the field lay his horse, already dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero paused, and to the strife attended:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And straight his wishes leant towards the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he would fain see conqueror in the fight:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet not for this would lend the champion aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to behold the cruel strife stood nigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! a two-handed stroke the giant made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the lesser warrior's casque, and by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mighty blow the knight was overlaid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other, when astound he saw him lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To deal the foe his death, his helm untied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that the warrior's face Rogero spied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Of his sweet lady, of his passing fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dearest Bradamant Rogero spies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lovely visage of its helmet bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards whom, to deal her death, the giant hies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that, advancing with his sword in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sudden battle him the Child defies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he, who will not wait for new alarm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Takes the half-lifeless lady in his arm,</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>And on his shoulder flings and bears away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As sometimes wolf a little lamb will bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or eagle in her crooked claws convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pigeon, or such-like bird, through liquid air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero runs with all the speed he may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who sees how needed is his succour there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with such strides the giant scours the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him with his eyes the knight pursues with pain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>This flying and that following, the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kept a close path which widened still, and they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Piercing that forest, issued forth to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On a wide meadow, which without it lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— No more of this. Orlando I pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That bore Cymosco's thunder-bolt away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this had in the deepest bottom drowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That never more the mischief might be found.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>But with small boot: for the impious enemy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of human nature, taught the bolt to frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After the shaft, which darting from the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pierces the cloud and comes to ground in flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, when he tempted Eve to eat and die</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the apple, hardly wrought more scathe and shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some deal before, or in our grandsires' day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guided a necromancer where it lay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>More than a hundred fathom buried so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where hidden it had lain a mighty space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The infernal tool by magic from below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was fished and born amid the German race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, by one proof and the other, taught to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its powers, and he who plots for our disgrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The demon, working on their weaker wit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As last upon its fatal purpose hit.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>To Italy and France, on every hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cruel art among all people past:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these the bronze in hollow mould expand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First in the furnace melted by the blast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Others the iron bore, and small or grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fashion the various tube they pierce or cast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bombard, gun, according to its frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or single cannon this, or double, name.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>This saker, culverine, or falcon hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I hear (all names the inventor has bestowed);</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which splits or shivers steel and stone outright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, where the bullet passes, makes a road.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Down to the sword, restore thy weapons bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sad soldier, to the forge, a useless load;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gun or carbine on thy shoulder lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who without these, I wot, shalt touch no pay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>How, foul and pestilent discovery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Didst thou find place within the human heart?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through thee is martial glory lost, through thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The trade of arms became a worthless art:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at such ebb are worth and chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the base often plays the better part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through thee no more shall gallantry, no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall valour prove their prowess as of yore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Through thee, alas! are dead, or have to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many noble lords and cavaliers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before this war shall end, which, Italy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afflicting most, has drowned the world in tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, if I said the word, I err not, I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saying he sure the cruellest appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And worst, of nature's impious and malign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who did this hateful engine first design:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And I shall think, in order to pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sin for ever, God has doomed to hell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That cursed soul, amid the unhappy crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside the accursed Judas there to dwell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But follow we the good Orlando, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So burns to seek Ebuda's island fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose foul inhabitants a monster sate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With flesh of women, fair and delicate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>But no less slow than eager was the knight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The winds appear, which still his course delay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, whether blowing on the left or right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or poop, so faintly in his canvas play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His bark makes little speed; and, spent outright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The breeze which wafts her sometimes dies away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or blows so foul, that he is fain to steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another course, or to the leeward veer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>It was the will of Heaven that he, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The King of Ireland, should not reach the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The he with greater ease upon that shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might act what shortly you shall understand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Make for the isle. Now" (said he) "may'st thou moor,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Thus issuing to the pilot his command),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"And give me for my need the skiff; for I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will to the rock without more company.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"The biggest cable that thou hast aboard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And biggest anchor to my hands consign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou shalt perceive why thus my boat is stored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I but meet that monster of the brine."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bade them lower the pinnace overboard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all things that befitted his design:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His arms he left behind, except his blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And singly for the rocky island made.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Home to his breast the count pulls either oar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the island at his back, to which he wends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In guise that, crawling up the sandy shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The crooked crab from sea or marsh ascends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It was the hour Aurora gay before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rising sun her yellow hair extends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(His orb as yet half-seen, half-hid from sight)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not without stirring jealous Tithon's spite.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Approaching to the naked rock as near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As vigorous hand might serve to cast a stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He knew not if he heard, or did not hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cry, so faint and feeble was the moan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, turning to the left, the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His level sight along the water thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Naked as born, bound to a stump, espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A dame whose feet were wetted by the tide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Because she distant is, and evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Holds down her face, he ill can her discern:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both sculls he pulls amain, and nears the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With keen desire more certain news to learn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now the winding beach is heard to roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wood and cave the mighty noise return;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The billows swell, and, lo! the beast! who pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And nigh concealed the sea beneath his breast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>As cloud from humid vale is seen to rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pregnant with rain and storm, which seems withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To extinguished day, and charged with deeper dyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than night, to spread throughout this earthly ball,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So swims the beast, who so much occupies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of sea, he may be said to keep it all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waves roar: collected in himself, the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Looks proudly on, unchanged in heart and cheer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>He, as one well resolved in his intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moved quickly to perform the feat he planned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for he would the damsel's harm prevent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would with that assail the beast at hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between her and the orc the boat he sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving within the sheath his idle brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anchor and cable next he takes in hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And waits the foe with constant heart and bold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>As soon as him the monster has descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And skiff at little interval, his throat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fish, to swallow him, expands so wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That horse and horseman through his jaws might float.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here Roland with the anchor, and beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Unless I am mistaken) with the boat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plunged, and engulphed the parted teeth betwixt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His anchor in the tongue and palate fixt;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>So that the monster could no longer drop</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or raise his horrid jaws, which this extends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Tis thus who digs the mine is wont to prop</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ground, and where he works the roof suspends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest sudden ruin whelm him from atop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While he incautiously his task intends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roland (so far apart was either hook)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But by a leap could reach the highest crook.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The prop so placed, Orlando now secure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the fell beast his mouth no more can close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unsheathes his sword, and, in that cave obscure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deals here and there, now thrusts, now trenchant blows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well as citadel, whose walls immure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The assailants, can defend her from her foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monster, harassed by the war within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Defends himself against the Paladin.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>Now floats the monstrous beast, o'ercome with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose scaly flanks upon the waves expand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now descends into the deepest main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scowers at the bottom, and stirs up the sand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rising flood ill able to sustain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavalier swims forth, and makes for land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He leaves the anchor fastened in his tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grasps the rope which from the anchor hung.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>So swimming till the island is attained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this towards the rock Orlando speeds:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hawls the anchor home (a footing gained),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pricked by whose double fluke, the monster bleeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The labouring orc to follow is constrained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dragged by that force which every force exceeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which at a single sally more achieves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than at ten turns the circling windlass heaves.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>As a wild bull, about whose horn is wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The unexpected noose, leaps here and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he has felt the cord, and turns him round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rolls and rises, yet slips not the snare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So from his pleasant seat and ancient bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dragged by that arm and rope he cannot tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With thousands of strange wheels and thousand slides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monster follows where the cable guides.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>This the red sea with reason would be hight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To-day, such streams of blood have changed its hue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where the monster lashed it in his spite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The eye its bottom through the waves might view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now he splashed the sky, and dimmed the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the clear sun, so high the water flew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The noise re-echoing round, the distant shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wood and hill rebound the deafening roar.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Forth from his grotto aged Proteus hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mounts above the surface at the sound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having seen Orlando dive, and rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the orc, and drag the monstrous fish to ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His scattered flock forgot, o'er ocean flies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While so the din increases, that, astound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Neptune bids yoke his dolphins, and that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For distant Aethiopia posts away.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>With Melicerta on her shoulders, weeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ino, and Nereids with dishevelled hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Glauci, Tritons, and their fellows, leaping</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They know not whither, speed, some here, some there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando draws to land, the billows sweeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That horrid fish, but might his labour spare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, with the torment worn, and travel sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The brute, exhausted, died, ere dragged ashore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Of the islanders had trooped no petty throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To witness that strange fight, who by a vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And miserable superstition stung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteemed such holy deed a work profane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said that this would be another wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Proteus, and provoke his ire again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make him his herds pour forth upon the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the whole old warfare vex the land;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And that it better were to sue for peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First from the injured god, lest worse ensue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Proteus from his cruel hate would cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If they into the sea the offender threw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As torch to torch gives fire, and lights increase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until the flame is spread the country through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even so from heart to heart the fury spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which in the waves would doom Orlando dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>These, armed with sling or bow, upon the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these supplied with spear or sword descend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on each side, behind him and before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Distant and near, as best they can, offend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At such a brutal insult wonders sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The peer, who sees that mischief they intend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In vengeance for the cruel monster slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence he had glory hoped, and praise to gain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>But as the usage is of surly bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By sturdy Russ or Lithuanian led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Little to heed the dogs in crowded fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor even at their yelps to turn his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The clamour of the churls assembled there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando witnessed with as little dread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who knew that he the rout which threatened death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had power to scatter at a single breath:</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>And speedily he made them yield him place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When turned on them, he grasped his trenchant blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Misjudging of his worth, the foolish race</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deemed that he would have short resistance made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since him they saw no covering buckler brace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uncuirassed, nor in other arms arrayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But knew not that, from head to foot, a skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More hard than diamond cased the Paladin.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>What by Orlando others cannot do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight by others can; at half a score</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of blows in all he thirty killed; by few</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He passed that measure, if the strokes were more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had already turned him to undo</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The naked lady, having cleared the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When other larum sounds, and other cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From a new quarter of the island rise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>While so the Paladin had kept in play</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The barbarous islanders, upon that hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The men of Ireland, without let or fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had poured from many quarters on the strand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now, without remorse or pity, slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The inhabitants, through all the wasted land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, was it justice moved, or cruel rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slaughter without regard to sex or age.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Little or no defender the island-crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Attempt; in part as taken unaware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In part that in the little place are few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that those few without a purpose are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Mid sack and fire, the wasted country through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The islanders are slain, and everwhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The walls are upon earth in ruin spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor in the land is left a living head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>As if the mighty tumult which he hears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shriek and ruin had concerned him nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The naked rock the bold Orlando nears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where she was placed, to feed the monster brought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He looks, and known to him the dame appears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more appears, when nigher her he sought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olympia she appears, and is indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olympia, whose faith reaped so ill a meed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>Wretched Olympia; whom, beside the scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Love put on her, Fortune too pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who sent the corsairs fell, which her had born</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That very day to the island of Ebude.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She Roland recollects on his return</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Landward; but, for the damsel naked stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only nought she to the warrior said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But dared not raise her eyes, and dropt her head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando asks what evil destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her to that cruel island had conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From where she in as much felicity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was with her consort left as could be said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"I know not (cried the weeping dame) if I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have thanks to render thee for death delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or should lament me that, through means of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This day did not my woes concluded see.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"I have to thank thee that from death, too dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And monstrous, thy good arm deliverance gave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which would have been too monstrous, had I fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beast, and in his belly found a grave:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But cannot thank thee that I am not dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since death alone can me from misery save,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well shall I thank thee for that wished relief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which can deliver me from every grief."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Next she related, with loud sobs and sighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How her false spouse betrayed her as she lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Asleep, and how of pirates made the prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They bore her from the desert isle away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as she spake, she turned her in the guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Dian, framed by artists, who pourtray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her carved or painted, as in liquid font</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She threw the water in Actaeon's front.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>For, as she can, her waist she hides, and breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More liberal of flowing flank and reins.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roland desires his ship, to find a vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To cover her, delivered from her chains:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While he is all intent upon this quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oberto comes; Oberto, he that reigns</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O'er Ireland's people, who had understood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How lifeless lay the monster of the flood;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>And, swimming, how, amid the watery roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A knight a weighty anchor in his throat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had fix'd, and so had dragged him to the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As men against the current track a boat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while Oberto comes; who, if his lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who told the tale, were true, desires to note;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While his invading army, far and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ebuda burn and waste on every side.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Oberto, though the Paladin to sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was dripping, and with water foul and gore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With gore, that from the orc, emerged to light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he had entered bodily, he bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He for the country knew the stranger knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he perused his face; so much the more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he had thought when told the tidings, none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save Roland could such mighty fear have done;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Knew him, because a page of honour he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had been in France, and for the crown, his right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his father's death, had crossed the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The year before. So often he the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had seen, and had with him held colloquy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their times of meeting had been infinite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He doffed his casque, with festive welcome pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the count, and clasped him to the breast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando is no less rejoined to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king, than is the king that champion true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After with friendly cheer and equal glee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had once or twice embraced the noble two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Oberto Roland told the treachery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had been done the youthful dame, and who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had done it, — false Bireno — that among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All men should least have sought to do her wrong.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>To him he told the many proofs and clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which the dame's affection had been tried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how she for Bireno kin and geer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had lost, and would in fine for him have died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how he this could warrant, and appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To vouch for much, as witness on her side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While thus to him her griefs Orlando showed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady's shining eyes with tears o'erflowed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Her face was such as sometimes in the spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We see a doubtful sky, when on the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A shower descends, and the sun, opening</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His cloudy veil, looks out amid the rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as the nightingale then loves to sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From branch of verdant stem her dulcet strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So in her beauteous tears his pinions bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love bathes, rejoicing in the chrystal light.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The stripling heats his golden arrow's head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At her bright eyes, then slacks the weapon's glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In streams, which falls between white flowers and red;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, the shaft tempered, strongly draws his bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And roves at him, o'er whom no shield is spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor iron rind, nor double mail below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, gazing on her tresses, eyes, and brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feels that his heart is pierced, he knows not how.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Olympia's beauties are of those most rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor is the forehead's beauteous curve alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Excellent, and her eyes and cheeks and hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mouth, nose, and throat, and shoulders; but, so down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descending from the lady's bosom fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Parts which are wont to be concealed by gown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are such, as haply should be placed before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whate'er this ample world contains in store.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>In whiteness they surpassed unsullied snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smooth ivory to the touch: above were seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two rounding paps, like new-pressed milk in show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fresh-taken from its crate of rushes green;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The space betwixt was like the valley low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which oftentimes we see small hills between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweet in its season, and now such as when</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Winter with snows has newly filled the glen.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The swelling hips and haunches' symmetry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The waist more clear than mirror's polished grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And members seem of Phidias' turnery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or work of better hand and nicer pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well to you of other parts should I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Relate, which she to hide desired in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sum the beauteous whole, from head to feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In her all loveliness is found complete.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>And had she in the Idaean glen unveiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In ancient days before the Phrygian swain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By how much heavenly Venus had prevailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not, though her rivals strove in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor haply had the youth for Sparta sailed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To violate the hospitable reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But said: "With Menelaus let Helen rest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No other prize I seek, of this possest";</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Or in Crotona dwelt, where the divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zeuxis in days of old his work projected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be the ornament of Juno's shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence so many naked dames collected;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in one form perfection to combine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some separate charm from this or that selected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from no other model need have wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since joined in her were all the charms he sought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>I do not think Bireno ever viewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Naked that beauteous form; for sure it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He never could have been so stern of mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to have left her on that desert lair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Ireland's king was fired I well conclude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor hid the flame that he within him bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He strives to comfort her, and hope instill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That future good shall end her present ill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And her to Holland promises to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vows till she is to her state restored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And just and memorable vengeance there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Achieved upon her perjured, traitor lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He never will unceasing war forbear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waged with all means that Ireland can afford;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this with all his speed. He, up and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meantime bids seek for female vest and gown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Now will it need to send in search of vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond the savage island's narrow bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since thither every day in such came dressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some dame, to feed the beast, from countries round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor long his followers there pursued the quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere many they of various fashions found.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So was Olympia clothed; while sad of mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was he, not so to clothe her as he wou'd.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>But never silk so choice or gold so fine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did the industrious Florentine prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor whosoever broiders gay design,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though on his task be spent time, toil, and care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Lemnos' god, nor Pallas' art divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Form raiment worthy of those limbs so fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That King Oberto cannot choose but he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Recalls them at each turn to memory.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>To see that love so kindled by the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On many grounds Orlando was content;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who not alone rejoiced that such a shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Put upon her, Bireno should repent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, that in the design on which he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He should be freed from grave impediment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not for Olympia thither had he made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, were his lady there, to lend her aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>To him, that there she was not, soon was clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But clear it was not if she had been there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or no; since of those islesmen, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One was not left the tidings to declare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The following day they from the haven steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all united in one squadron fare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Paladin with them to Ireland hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From whence to France the warrior's passage lies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Scarcely a day in Ireland's realm he spends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for no prayers his purposed end forbore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love, that in quest of his liege-lady sends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight upon this track, permits no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Departing, he Olympia recommends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the Irish monarch, who to serve her swore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although this needed not; since he was bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than behoved, her wishes to content:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>So levied in few days his warlike band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (league with England's kind and Scotland's made)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Holland and in Friesland left no land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the false duke, so rapid was the raid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to rebel against that lord's command</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His Zealand stirred; nor he the war delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until by him Bireno's blood was spilt:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A punishment that ill atoned his guilt.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Oberto takes to wife Olympia fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her of countess makes a puissant queen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But be the Paladin again our care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who furrows , night and day, the billows green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And strikes his sails in the same harbour, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They to the wind erewhile unfurled had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All armed, he on his Brigliadoro leaps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leaves behind him winds and briny deeps.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The remnant of the winter, he with shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And spear achieved things worthy to be shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I ween; but these were then so well concealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It is no fault of mine they are not blown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For good Orlando was in fighting field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prompter to do, than make his prowess known.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor e'er was bruited action of the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save when some faithful witness was in sight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>That winter's remnant he so passed that feat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his was known not to the public ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when within that animal discreet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Phryxus bore, the sun illumed the sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Zephyrus returning glad and sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brought back with him again the blooming year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wondrous deeds Orlando did in stower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared with the new grass and dainty flower.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>From plain to hill, from champaign flat to shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oppressed with grief and pain the County fares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When a long cry, entering a forest hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— A load lamenting smites upon his ears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He grasps his brand and spurs his courser sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And swiftly pricks toward the sound he hears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I shall at another season say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What chanced, and may be heard in future lay.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
