<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-33" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Bradamant sees in picture future fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There, where she gained admission by the spear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From combat cease, upon Bayardo’s flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gradasso and Montalban’s cavalier.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While soaring through the world, the English knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arrives in Nubia’s distant realm, and here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Driving the Harpies from the royal board,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hunts to the mouth of hell that impious horde.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Timagoras, Parrhasius, Polygnote,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-386" id="noteref-386" epub:type="noteref">386</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Protogenes, renowned Apollodore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Timanthes, and Apelles, first of note,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zeuxis and others, famed heretofore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose memory down the stream of Time will float,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While we their wreck and labours lost deplore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose fame will flourish still in Fate’s despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Grammercy authors!) while men read and write.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And those, yet living or of earlier day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mantegna, Leonardo, Gian Belline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Dossi, and, skilled to carve or to portray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Michael, less man than angel and divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bastìano, Raphael, Titian, who (as they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Urbino and Venice) makes Cadoro shine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With more, whose works resemble what he hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And credit of those spirits, famed whilere;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The painters we have seen, and others, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thousands of years ago in honour stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Things which had been with matchless pencil drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some working upon wall, and some on wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But never, amid masters old or new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have ye of pictures heard or pictures viewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of things to come; yet such have been portrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the deeds were done which they displayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet let not artist whether new or old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Boast of his skill such wondrous works to make;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But leave this feat to spell, wherewith controlled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The spirits of the infernal bottom quake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hall, whereof in other strain I told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With volume sacred to Avernus’ lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Norsine grot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-387" id="noteref-387" epub:type="noteref">387</a> throught subject Demons’ might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was made by Merlin in a single night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That art, whereby those ancient erst portrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such wonders, is extinguished in our day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to the troop, by whom will be surveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The painted chamber, I return, and say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A squire attendant on a signal made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bore thither lighted torches, by whose ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were scattered from that hall the shades of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this in open day had shown more bright.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When thus the castle’s lord addressed that crew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Know, of adventures in this chamber wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up to our days, have yet been witnessed few;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A warfare storied, but its fields unfought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who limned the battles, these as well foreknew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here of defeats to come and victories taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whate’er in Italy our host befalls</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You may discern as painted on these walls.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The wars, wherein French armies should appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond the Alps, of foul event or fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even from his days until the thousandth year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the prophetic Merlin painted were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hither Great Britain’s monarch sent the seer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him, that of King Marcomir was heir:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why hither sent, and why this hall was made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the same time to you shall be displayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“King Pharamond, the first of those that passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Rhine, amid his Franks’ victorious train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Gaul was won, bethought him how to cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On restive Italy the curbing rein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this; that evermore he wasting fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beheld the Roman empire’s feeble reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (for both reigned at once) would make accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To compass his design, with Britain’s lord.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The royal Arthur, by whom nought was done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without the ripe advice of Merlin sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Merlin, I say, the Devils mighty son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well versed in what should chance in future age,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knowing through him, to Pharamond made known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would in many woes his host engage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Entering that region, which, with rugged mound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Apennine parts, and Alp and sea surround.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“To him sage Merlin shows, that well nigh all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those other monarchs that in France will reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By murderous steel will see their people fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Consumed by famine, or by fever slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that short joy, long sorrow, profit small,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And boundless ill shall recompense their pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since vainly will the lily seek to shoot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the Italian fields its withered root.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“King Pharamond so trusted to the seer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he resolved to turn his arms elsewhere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Merlin, who beheld with sight as clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The things to be, as things that whilom were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis said, was brought by magic art to rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The painted chamber at the monarch’s prayer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein whatever deeds the Franks shall do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if already done, are plain to view.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That king who should succeed, might comprehend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he renown and victory would obtain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whene’er his friendly squadrons should defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From all barbarians else the Italian reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, if to damage her he should descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thinking to bind her with the griding chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Might comprehend, I say, and read his doom⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How he beyond these hills should find a tomb.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So said, he leads the listening ladies where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those pictured histories begin; to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How Sigisbert his arms will southward bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For what imperial Maurice shall bestow.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-388" id="noteref-388" epub:type="noteref">388</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Behold him from the Mount of Jove repair<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-389" id="noteref-389" epub:type="noteref">389</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither where Ambra and Ticino flow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eutar behold,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-390" id="noteref-390" epub:type="noteref">390</a> who not alone repels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But puts the foe to flight, and routs and quells.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Where they with Clovis tread the mountain way,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-391" id="noteref-391" epub:type="noteref">391</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than a hundred thousand warriors trace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See Benevento’s duke the monarch stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose thinner files his hostile army face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! these who feign retreat an ambush lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! where through danger, havoc, and disgrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Franks, who to the Lombard wine-fat hie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drugged by the bait, like poisoned mullets die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Where Childibert the boundary hills has crost,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-392" id="noteref-392" epub:type="noteref">392</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heading what bands of France and captains, see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet shall no more than baffled Clovis boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The conquest or the spoil of Lombardy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaven’s sword descends so heavy on his host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Choked with their bodies every road shall be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So pined with watery flux and withering sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, out of ten, unharmed returns not one.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He shows King Pepin, shows King Charlemagne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How into Italy their march they bend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one and the other fair success obtain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because her land they came not to offend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Stephen one, the other Adriane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, after, injured Leo, would defend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-393" id="noteref-393" epub:type="noteref">393</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This quells Astolpho, and that takes his heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And re-establishes the papal chair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A youthful Pepin of the royal line</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He after shows; who seemed to spread his host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even from <b>The Kilns</b> to the Isle of Palestine;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-394" id="noteref-394" epub:type="noteref">394</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with a bridge, achieved at mighty cost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At Malamocco, to bestride the brine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on Rialto’s shore his battle post.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then fly and leave his drowning bands behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His bridge destroyed by wasting waves and wind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Burgundian Lewis ye behold descend<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-395" id="noteref-395" epub:type="noteref">395</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither with his invading squadrons, where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vanquishing and taken, nevermore to offend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hostile arms, he is compelled to swear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold! he slights his solemn oath⁠—to wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anew, with reckless steps, into the snare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! there he leaves his eyes; and his array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blind as the moldwarp, hence their lord convey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You see him named from Arles, victorious Hugh,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-396" id="noteref-396" epub:type="noteref">396</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Italy the Berengari chase!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom, quelled and broken twice and thrice, anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now the Bavarians, now the Huns, replace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’ermatched, he then for peace is fain to sue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor long survives, nor he who fills his place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Berengarius yielding his domains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, repossest of all his kingdom, reigns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You see, her goodly pastor to sustain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another Charles set fire to Italy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who has two kings in two fierce battles slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Manfred and Conradine, and after see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His bands, who seem to vex the new-won reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With many wrongs, and who dispersedly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Some here, some there⁠—in different cities dwell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slain on the rolling of the vesper-bell.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-397" id="noteref-397" epub:type="noteref">397</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He shows them next (but after interval,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twould seem, of many and many an age, not years)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How, “through the Alps, a captain out of Gaul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To war upon the great Viscontis, steers;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-398" id="noteref-398" epub:type="noteref">398</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seems to straiten Alexandria’s wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Girt with his forces, foot and cavaliers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A garrison within, an ambuscade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without the works, the warlike duke has laid;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And the French host, decoyed in cunning wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither where the surrounding toils are spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conducted on that evil enterprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Armagnac, the Gallic squadron’s head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slaughtered throughout the spacious champaign lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or is to Alexandria captive led:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While, swoln not more with water than with blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tanarus purples wide Po’s ample flood.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Successively that castellain displayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One hight of Marca,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-399" id="noteref-399" epub:type="noteref">399</a> of the Anjouites three.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How “Marsi, Daunians, Salentines,” (he said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“And Bruci, these shall oft molest, you see:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet not by Frank or Latian’s friendly aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall one delivered from destruction be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! from the realm, as oft as they attack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alphonso and Gonsalvo beat them back.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You see the eighth Charles, amid his martial train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flower of France, through Alpine pass has pressed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-400" id="noteref-400" epub:type="noteref">400</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who Liris fords, and takes all Naples’ reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet draws not sword nor lays a lance in rest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All, save that rock which⁠—Typheus’ endless pain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lies on the giant’s belly, arms, and breast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Inigo del Guasto here withstood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Derived from Avalo’s illustrious blood.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The warder of the castle, who makes clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To beauteous Bradamant that history,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Says, having shown her Ischia’s island, “Ere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I lead you further other things to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ll tell what my great-grandfather whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—I then a child⁠—was wont to tell to me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which in like manner (that great-grandsire said),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well to him his father whilome read;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And <em>his</em> from sire or grandsire heard recite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So son from sire; even to that baron, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heard it related by the very wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That these fair pictures without pencil drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which you see painted azure, red, and white.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He when to Pharamond (as now to you)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was shown the castle on the rocky mount,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-401" id="noteref-401" epub:type="noteref">401</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heard him relate the things I now recount.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Heard him relate, how in that fortilage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From that good knight should spring, who, ’twould appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guards it so well, he scorns the fires that rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even to the Pharo, flaming far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, or within short space, and in that age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(And named the week and day, as well as year,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A noble warrior, unexcelled in worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By other, that has yet appeared on earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nereus less fair,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-402" id="noteref-402" epub:type="noteref">402</a> Achilles was less strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less was Ulysses famed for daring feat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nestor, that knew so much and lived so long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less prudent; nimble Ladas was less fleet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less liberal and less prompt to pardon wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Caesar, whose praises ancient tales repeat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that, compared with him, in Ischia born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each might appear of vaunted virtues shorn;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And if illustrious Crete rejoiced of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In giving birth to Coelus’ godlike heir;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If Thebes in Hercules and Bacchus bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If Delos boasted of her heavenly pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nought should as well this happy isle withhold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From lifting high her glorious head in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When that great Marquis shall in her be born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom with its every grace shall Heaven adorn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sage Merlin said⁠—and oft renewed that say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘He was reserved to flourish in an age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When most opprest the Roman empire lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he might free that holy heritage:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But as some deeds of his I must display</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hereafter, these I will not now presage.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So spake that wizard, and renewed the story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which told of Charlemagne’s predestined glory.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Lewis,’ (so learned Merlin said,) ‘is woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To have brought to Italy King Charlemagne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he called in to harass, not o’erthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ancient rival of his goodly reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At his return declares himself his foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, leagued with Venice, would the king detain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold that valiant monarch couch his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in his foes’ despite a passage clear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘But his new kingdom leaving to his band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far other destiny awaits that throng:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, with the Mantuan’s friendly succour manned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gonsalvo to the war returns so strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He leaves not in few months, by sea or land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One living head, his slaughtered troops among.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But then, because of one by treason spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In him appears the joy of triumph shent.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So saying, to his guests the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alphonso, of Pescara hight, displayed:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-403" id="noteref-403" epub:type="noteref">403</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Who in a thousand feats will shine more clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than the resplendent carbuncle,” he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Behold, deceived by faithless treaty, here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid snares by the malignant Aethiop laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Transfixt with deadly dart the warrior lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In whom the age’s worthiest champion dies.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Under Italian escort next they see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the twelfth Lewis o’er the hills is gone;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-404" id="noteref-404" epub:type="noteref">404</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has by its roots uptorn the mulberry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in Viscontis’ land the lilies sown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Treading in Charles’s steps, by him shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bridges athwart the Garigliano thrown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet after shall he mourn his army’s slaughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dispersed and drowning in that fatal water.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>(The lord pursues) “with no less overthrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Broken in Puglia, see the Gallic train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In him who twice entraps the routed foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gonslavo you behold, the pride of Spain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fortune to Lewis a fair face shall show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As late a troubled mien, upon that plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which even to where vext Adria pours her tides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Po, between Alp and Apennine, divides.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The host reproved himself, while so he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pieced his tale, as having left untold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Things first in order; next to them displayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A royal castle by its warder sold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A prisoner by the faithless Switzer made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He shows the lord who hired him with his gold:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-405" id="noteref-405" epub:type="noteref">405</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which double treason, without couching lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has given the victory to the king of France.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That warder then shows Caesar Borgia, grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Puissant in Italy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-406" id="noteref-406" epub:type="noteref">406</a> through this king’s grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all Rome’s peerage, and all lords that own</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her sway, he into exile seems to chase:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then shows the king, that will the saw take down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And papal acorns in Bologna place:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-407" id="noteref-407" epub:type="noteref">407</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then Genoa’s burghers, by this monarch broke,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-408" id="noteref-408" epub:type="noteref">408</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rebel city stooping to his yoke.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You see,” (pursued that warder,) “how with dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Covered is Ghiaradada’s green champaign.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-409" id="noteref-409" epub:type="noteref">409</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seems each city opes her gates through dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Venice scarce her freedom can maintain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You see he suffers not the Church’s head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Passing the narrow confines of Romagne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Modena from Ferrara’s duke to reave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would not to that prince a remnant leave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay he Bologna rescues from his sway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither the Bentivogli them betake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You next see Lewis siege to Brescia lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the close-straitened city storm and take;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Felsina almost at the same time stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With succour, and the papal army break;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next, ’twould seem, that either hostile band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lies tented upon Chassis’ level strand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“On this side France, upon the other Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extend their files, and battle rages high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fast fall the men at arms in either train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the green earth is tinged with crimson dye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flooded with human gore seems every drain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mars doubts to whom to give the victory;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When through Alphonso’s worth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-410" id="noteref-410" epub:type="noteref">410</a> the Spaniards yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the victorious Franks maintain the field;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And, for Ravenna sacked and ravaged lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Roman pastor bites his lips through woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Called by him, from the hills, in tempest’s guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swoop the fierce Germans on the fields below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seems each Frenchman unresisting flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chased by their bands beyond the mountain snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that they set the mulberry’s thriving shoot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There, whence they plucked the golden lily’s root.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Behold the Frank returns, and here behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is broken, by the faithless Swiss betrayed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-411" id="noteref-411" epub:type="noteref">411</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, that his royal father seized and sold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose succour dearly by the youth is paid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those over whom false Fortune’s wheel had rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile, beneath another king arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You here behold, preparing to efface</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With vengeful deed Novara’s late disgrace;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And see with better auspices return</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The valiant Francis, foremost of his train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who so shall break the haughty Switzer’s horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That little short of spent their bands remain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And them shall nevermore the style adorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Usurped by that foul troop of churlish vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of scourge of princes, and the faith’s defence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To which those rustics rude shall make pretence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lo! he takes Milan, in the league’s despite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! with the youthful Sforza makes accord:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! Bourbon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-412" id="noteref-412" epub:type="noteref">412</a> the fair city keeps, in right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Francis, from the furious German horde:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! while in other high emprize and fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Elsewhere is occupied his royal lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor knows the pride and license of his host</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through these the city shall anew be lost.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lo! other Francis<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-413" id="noteref-413" epub:type="noteref">413</a> who his grandsire’s vein</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inherits, not his generous name alone!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who by the Church’s favour will regain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—The Gaul expelled⁠—a land which was his own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">France too returns, but keeps a tighter rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor over Italy, as wont, has flown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Mantua’s noble duke the foe shall stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, at Ticino’s passage, bar his way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Though on his cheek youth’s blossoms scarce appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthy immortal glory, Frederick shines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well that praise deserves, since by his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But more by care and skill, Pavia’s lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the French defends that cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And frustrates the sea-lion’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-414" id="noteref-414" epub:type="noteref">414</a> bold designs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You see two marquises, Italia’s boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And both, alike the terror of our host.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Both of one blood and of one nest they are;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The foremost is the bold Alphonso’s seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom, led by that false black into the snare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You late beheld in purple torrent bleed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You see defeated by his counsel ware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How oft the Franks from Italy recede.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The next, of visage so benign and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is lord of Guasto and Alphonso hight;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This is that goodly knight, whose praise you heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When rugged Ischia’s island I displayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of whom sage Merlin, with prophetic word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Pharamond such mighty matters said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose birth should to that season be deferred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When more than ever such a champion’s aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the barbarous enemy’s attack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vext Italy, and Church, and Empire lack.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He in his cousin of Pescara’s rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Prosper Colonna, chief of that emprize⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes the rude Switzer pay Bicocca dear,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-415" id="noteref-415" epub:type="noteref">415</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Paid by the Frenchman in yet dearer wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold where France prepares for fresh career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to repair her many losses tries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold one host on Lombardy descend!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold that other against Naples wend!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bust she, that moves us like the dust which flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the restless wind, which whirls it round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lifts if aloft awhile, and from the skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blows back anew the rising cloud to ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a hundred thousand swells, in Francis’ eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The soldiers who Pavia’s walls surround.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch sees but that which he commands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor marks how wax or waste his leaguering bands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Tis thus that, through the greedy servant’s sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And easy sovereign’s goodness, on his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The files beneath his banners muster thin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When in his midnight camp, ‘to arms,’ is cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For by the wary Spaniards charged within</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His ramparts is he; foes that with the guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Avalo’s fair lineage, would assay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make to heaven or hell their desperate way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You see the best of the nobility</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all fair France extinguished on the field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How many swords, how many lances, see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Spaniards round the valiant monarch wield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold! his horse falls under him; yet he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will neither own himself subdued, or yield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though to assault him from all sides is run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By wrathful bands, and succour there is none.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The monarch well defends him from the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All over bathed with blood of hostile vein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But valour stoops at last to numbers; lo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king is taken, is conveyed to Spain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all upon Pescara’s lord bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him of that inseparable twain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Guasto hight⁠—the praise and prime renown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that great king captived and host o’erthrown.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This host o’erthrown upon Pavia’s plains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, bound for Naples, halts upon its way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As an ill-nourished lamp or taper wanes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For want of wax or oil, with flickering ray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! the king leaves his sons in Spanish chains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And home returns, his own domain to sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! while in Italy he leads his band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another wars upon his native land.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-416" id="noteref-416" epub:type="noteref">416</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“In every part you see how Rome is woe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-417" id="noteref-417" epub:type="noteref">417</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid ruthless rapine, murder, fire, and rape.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See all to wasting rack and ruin go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And nothing human or divine escape.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The league’s men hear the shrieks, behold the glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of hostile fires, and lo! they backward shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their course, where they should hurry on their way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leave the pontiff to his foes a prey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lautrec the monarch sends with other bands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet not anew to war on Lombardy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to deliver from rapacious hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Church’s head and limbs, already free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So slowly he performs the king’s commands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next, overrun by him the kingdom see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his strong arms against the city turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein the Syren’s body lies inurned.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-418" id="noteref-418" epub:type="noteref">418</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lo! the imperial squadrons thither steer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-419" id="noteref-419" epub:type="noteref">419</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aid to the leaguered city to convey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lo! burnt, sunk, destroyed, they disappear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encountered by the Doria in mid-way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold; how Fortune light does shift and veer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So friendly to the Frenchman till this day!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who slays their host with fever, not with lance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor of a thousand one returns to France.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These histories and more the pictures shew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For to tell all would ask too long a strain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In beauteous colours and of different hue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since such that hall, it these could well contain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The painting twice and thrice those guests review,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor how to leave them knows the lingering train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twould seem; perusing oft what they behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inscribed below the beauteous work in gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When with these pictures they their sight had fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And talked long while⁠—these ladies and the rest⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They to their chambers by that Lord were led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wont much to worship every worthy guest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already all were sleeping, when her bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At last Duke Aymon’s beauteous daughter prest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She here, she there, her restless body throws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now right, now left, but vainly seeks repose:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet slumber toward dawn, and in a dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The form of her Rogero seems to view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vision cries: “Why vex yourself, and deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Things real which are hollow and untrue?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Backwards shall sooner flow the mountain-stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than I to other turn my thought from you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When you I love not, then unloved by me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This heart, these apples of mine eyes, will be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hither have I repaired (it seemed he said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be baptised and do as I professed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I have lingered, I have been delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By other wound than that of Love opprest.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that he vanished from the martial maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the vision broken was her rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">New floods of tears the awakened damsel shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to herself in this sad fashion said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What pleased was but a dream; alas! a sheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reality is this my waking bane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My joy a dream and prompt to disappear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No dream my cruel and tormenting pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah! wherefore what I seemed to see and hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cannot I, waking, see and hear again?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What ails ye, wretched eyes, that closed ye show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unreal good, and open but on woe?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sweet sleep with promised peace my soul did buoy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I to bitter warfare wake anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweet sleep but brought with it fallacious joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But⁠—sure and bitter⁠—waking ills ensue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If falsehood so delight and truth annoy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never more may I see or hear what’s true!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If sleeping brings me weal, and watching woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pains of waking may I never know!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Blest animals that sleep through half the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ope your heavy eyelids, night nor day!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if such tedious sleep like death appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such watching is like life, I will not say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since⁠—such my lot, beyond all wont, severe⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I death in watching, life in sleep assay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But oh! if death such sleep resemble, Death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even now I pray three stop my fleeting breath!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The clouds were gone, the horizon overspread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With glowing crimson by the new-born sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in these signs, unlike the past, was read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A better promise of the day begun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Bradamant upstarted from her bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And armed her for the journey to be done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her thanks first rendered to the courteous lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For his kind of cheer and hospitable board.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And found, the lady messenger, with maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And squire, had issued from the castled hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was afield, where her arrival stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those three good warriors, those the damsel bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The eve before had on the champaign laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast from their horses by her lance of gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who had suffered, to their mighty pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All night, the freezing wind and pattering rain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Add to such ill, that, hungering sore for food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They and their horses, through the livelong night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trampling the mire, with chattering teeth, had stood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But (what well-nigh engendered more despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Say not well nigh⁠—more moved the warrior’s mood)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was that they knew the damsel would recite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How they had been unhorsed by hostile lance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the first course which they had run in France;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And⁠—each resolved to die or else his name</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith in new encounter to retrieve⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Ulany, the message-bearing dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Whose style no longer I unmentioned leave),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fairer notion of their knightly fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than heretofore, might haply now conceive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bold Bradamant anew to fight defied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When of the drawbridge clear they her descried;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not thinking, howsoe’er, she was a maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in no look or act the maid confest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Duke Aymon’s daughter, loth to be delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Refuses, as a traveller that is pressed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But they so often and so sorely prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she could ill refuse the kings’ request.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her lance she levels, at three strokes extends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All three on earth, and thus the warfare ends:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For Bradamant no more her courser wheeled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But turned her back upon the foes o’erthrown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They, that intent to gain the golden shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had sought a land so distant from their own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rising in sullen silence from the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For speech with all their hardihood was gone)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared as stupefied by their surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor to Ulania dared to lift their eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For they, as thither they their course addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had vaunted to the maid in boasting vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“No paladin or knight with lance in rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the worst his saddle could maintain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make them vail yet more their haughty crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And look upon the world with less disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She tells them, by no paladin or peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were they unhorsed, but by a woman’s spear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now what of Roland’s and Rinaldo’s might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not without reason held in such renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ought you to think (she said) when thus in fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye by a female hand are overthrown?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say, if the buckler one of these requite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Better than by a woman ye have done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will ye by those redoubted warriors do?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So think not I, nor haply think so you.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This may suffice you all; and need in none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A clearer proof of prowess to display;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who desires, if rashly any one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desires, again his valour to assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would add but scathe to shame, now made his own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now; and the same to-day as yesterday.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless perchance he thinks it praise and gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By such illustrious warriors to be slain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When they by Ulany were certified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A woman’s hand had caused their overthrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with a deeper black than pitch had dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their honour, heretofore so fair of show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more than ten her story testified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where one sufficed⁠—with such o’erwhelming woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were they possest, they with such fury burned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They well nigh on themselves their weapons turned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What arms they had upon them, they unbound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cast them, strung by rage and fury sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the moat which girt that castle round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor even kept the faulchions which they wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, since a woman them had cast to ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’erwhelmed with rage and shame, the warriors swore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Themselves of such a crying shame to clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“They, without bearing arms, would pass a year;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And that they evermore afoot would fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up hill or down, by mountain or by plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, when the year was ended, would they wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knightly mail or climb the steed again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save that from other they by force should bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In battle, other steeds and other chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, without arms, to punish their misdeeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These wend afoot, those others on their steeds.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lodged in a township at the fall of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Duke Aymon’s daughter, journeying Paris-ward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hears how King Agramant was foiled in fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Good harbourage withal of bed and board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She in her hostel found; but small delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This and all comforts else to her afford.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the sad damsel meat and sleep foregoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor finds a resting place; far less repose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But so I will not on her story dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As not to seek anew the valiant twain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, by consent, beside a lonely well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had tied their goodly coursers by the rein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I of their war to you somedeal will tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A war not waged for empire or domain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that the best should buckle to his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Good Durindana, and Bayardo ride.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No signal they, no trumpet they attend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To blow them to the lists, no master who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should teach them when to foin and when to fend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or wake their sleeping wrath; their swords they drew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, one against the other, boldly wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With lifted blades, the quick and dext’rous two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already ’gan the champions’ fury heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fast and hard their swords were heard to beat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>None e’er by proof two other faulchions chose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For sound and solid, able to endure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Three strokes alone of such conflicting foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Passing all means and measure; but so pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So perfect was their temper, from all blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By such repeated trial so secure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They in a thousand strokes might clash on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Nay more, nor yet the solid metal fly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With mickle industry, with mighty pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And art, Rinaldo, shifting here and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Avoids the deadly dint of Durindane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well knowing how ’tis wont to cleave and tear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso struck with greater might and main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But well nigh all his strokes were spent in air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of, if he sometimes smote, he smote on part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Durindana wrought less harm than smart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo with more skill his blade inclined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stunned the arm of Sericana’s lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him oft he reached where casque and coat confined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And often raked his haunches with the sword:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But adamantine was his corslet’s rind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor link the restless faulchion broke or bored.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If so impassive was the paynim’s scale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Know, charmed by magic was the stubborn mail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Without reposing they long time had been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon their deadly battle so intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, save on one another’s troubled mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their angry eyes the warriors had not bent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When such despiteous war and deadly spleen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Diverted by another strife, were spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hearing a mighty noise, both champions turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And good Bayardo, sore bested, discern.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They good Bayardo by a monster view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—A bird, and bigger than that courser⁠—prest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above three yards in length appeared to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monster’s beak; a bat in all the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equipt with feathers, black as ink in hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And piercing talons was the winged pest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An eye of fire it had, a cruel look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, like ship-sails, two spreading pinions shook.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Perhaps it was a bird; but when or where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another bird resembling this was seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not, I, nor have I any where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Except in Turpin, heard that such has been.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence that it was a fiend, to upper air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Evoked from depths of nether hell I ween;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Malagigi raised by magic sleight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That so he might disturb the champions’ fight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So deemed Rinaldo too: and contest sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twixt him and Malagigi hence begun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he would not confess the charge; nay swore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even by the light which lights the glorious sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he might clear him of the blame he bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had not that which was imputed done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether a fiend or fowl, the pest descends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And good Bayardo with his talons rends.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quickly the steed, possessed of mickle might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Breaks loose, and, in his fury and despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the monster strives with kick and bite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But swiftly he retires and soars in air:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thence returning, prompt to wheel and smite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Circles and beats the courser, here and there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wholly unskilled in fence, and sore bested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bayardo swiftly from the monster fled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bayardo to the neighbouring forest flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeking the closest shade and thickest spray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above the feathered monster flaps, with eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Intent to mark where widest is the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that good horse the greenwood threads, and lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At last within a grot, concealed from day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the winged beast has lost Bayardo’s traces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He soars aloft, and other quarry chases.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo and Gradasso, who descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bayardo’s flight, the conqueror’s destined meed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The battle to suspend, on either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till they regained the goodly horse, agreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saved from that fowl which chased him, far and wide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conditioning whichever found the steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him anew should to that fountain wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside whose brim their battle they should end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quitting the fount, they follow, where they view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">New prints upon the forest greensward made:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By much Bayardo distances the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose tardy feet their wishes ill obeyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself the king on his Alfana threw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That near at hand was tethered in the glade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving his foe behind in evil plight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Never more malcontent and vext in sprite.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo ceased in little time to spy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bayardo’s traces, who strange course had run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made for thorny thicket, wet or dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tree, rock, or river, with design to shun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those cruel claws, which, pouncing from the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him such outrage and such scathe had done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, after labour vain and sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To await him at the fount returned once more;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In case, as erst concerted by the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king should thither with the steed resort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But having sought him there with little gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fared to his camp afoot, with piteous port.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return we now to him of Sericane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He that had sped withal in other sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, not by judgement, guided to his prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But his rare fortune, heard Bayardo neigh;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And found him shrowded in his caverned lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So sore moreover by his fright opprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He feared to issue into open air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus of that horse himself the king possest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well he remembered their conditions were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bring him to the fount; but little pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now was that knight to keep the promise made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus within himself in secret said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Win him who will, in war and strife, I more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desire in peace to make the steed my own:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the world’s further side, did I of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wend hitherward, and for this end alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having the courser, he mistakes me sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thinks the prize by me will be foregone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him would Rinaldo conquer, let him fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Ind, as I to France have made repair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For him no less secure is Sericane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than twice for me has been his France,” he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pricked for Arles, along the road most plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in its haven found the fleet arrayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Freighted with him, the steed and Durindane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A well-rigged galley from that harbour weighed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of these hereafter!⁠—I, at other call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now quit Rinaldo, king, and France, and all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Astolpho in his flight will I pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That made his hippogryph like palfrey flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With reins and sell, so quick the welkin through;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hawk and eagle soar a course less free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er the wide land of Gaul the warrior flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Pyrenees to Rhine, from sea to sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He westward to the mountains turned aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which France’s fertile land from Spain divide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To Arragon he past out of Navarre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—They who beheld, sore wondering at the sight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then leaves he Tarragon behind him far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his left, Biscay upon his right:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Traversed Castile, Gallicia, Lisbon, are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seville and Cordova, with rapid flight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor city on sea-shore, nor inland plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is unexplored throughout the realm of Spain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beneath him Cadiz and the strait he spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where whilom good Alcides closed the way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the Atlantic to the further side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Egypt, bent o’er Africa, to stray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The famous Balearic isles descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Ivica, that in his passage lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Toward Arzilla then he turned the rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above the sea that severs it from Spain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Morocco, Fez, and Oran, looking down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hippona, Argier, he, and Bugia told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from all cities bear away the crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No palm or parsley wreath, but crown of gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Noble Biserta next and Tunis-town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Capys, Alzerba’s isle, the warrior bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tripoli, Berniche, Ptolomitta viewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And into Asia’s land the Nile pursued.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twixt Atlas’ shaggy ridges and the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He viewed each regions in his spacious round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He turned his back upon Carena hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And skimmed above the Cyrenaean ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Passing the sandy desert of the Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Albajada, reached the Nubian’s bound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left Battus’ tomb behind him on the plain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-420" id="noteref-420" epub:type="noteref">420</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Ammon’s, now dilapidated, fane.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To other Tremizen he posts, where bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well the people are in Mahound’s style;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For other Aethiops then his pinions spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which face the first, and lie beyond the Nile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between Coallee and Dobada sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bound for the Nubian city’s royal pile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threading the two, where, ranged on either land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moslems and Christians watch, with arms in hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In Aethiopia’s realm Senapus reigns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose sceptre is the cross; of cities brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of men, of gold possest, and broad domains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the Red Sea’s extremest waters lave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A faith well nigh like ours that king maintains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which man from his primaeval doom may save.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here, save I err in what their rites require,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The swarthy people are baptised with fire.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-421" id="noteref-421" epub:type="noteref">421</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Astolpho lighted in the spacious court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Intending on the Nubian king to wait.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less strong than sumptuous is the wealthy fort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein the royal Aethiop keeps his state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The chains that serve the drawbridge to support,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bolts, the bars, the hinges of the gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And finally whatever we behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Herewrought in iron, there is wrought in gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>High prized withal, albeit it so abound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is that best metal; lodges built in air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which on all sides the wealthy pile surround,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clear colonnades with crystal shafts upbear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of green, white, crimson, blue and yellow ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A frieze extends below those galleries fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here at due intervals rich gems combine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And topaz, sapphire, emerald, ruby shine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In wall and roof and pavement scattered are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full many a pearl, full many a costly stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here thrives the balm; the plants were ever rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Compared with these, which were in Jewry grown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The musk which we possess from thence we bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From thence on other shores in amber thrown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fine those products from this clime are brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which in our regions are so prized and sought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sultan, king of the Egyptian land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pays tribute to this sovereign, as his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They say, since having Nile at his command</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He may divert the stream to other bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence, with its district upon either hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith might Cairo lack its daily bread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Senapus him his Nubian tribes proclaim:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We Priest and Prester John the sovereign name.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-422" id="noteref-422" epub:type="noteref">422</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of all those Aethiop monarchs, beyond measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first was this, for riches and for might;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he with all his puissance, all his treasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! had miserably lost his sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet was this the monarch’s least displeasure:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vexed by a direr and a worse despite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Harassed, though richest of those Nubian kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By a perpetual hunger’s cruel stings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whene’er to eat or drink the wretched man</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prepared, by that resistless need pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith⁠—infernal and avenging clan⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared the monstrous Harpies’ craving brood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, armed with beak and talons, overran</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vessel and board, and preyed upon the food;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what their wombs suffice not to receive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foul and defiled the loathsome monsters leave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And this: because upborn by such a tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of full-blown honours, in his unripe age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he excelled in heart and nerve, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The riches of his royal heritage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like Lucifer, the monarch waxed in pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And war upon his maker thought to wage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with his host against the mountain went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Egypt’s mighty river finds a vent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Upon this hill which well-nigh kissed the skies,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-423" id="noteref-423" epub:type="noteref">423</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Piercing the clouds, the king had heard recite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was seated the terrestrial paradise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where our first parents flourished in delight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With camels, elephants, and footmen hies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither that king, confiding in his might;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With huge desire if peopled be the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bring its nations under his command.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>God marred the rash emprise, and from on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sent down an angel, whose destroying sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hundred thousand of that chivalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slew, and to endless night condemned their lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Emerging, next, from hellish caverns, fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These horrid harpies and assault his board;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which still pollute or waste the royal meat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor leave the monarch aught to drink or eat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And him had plunged in uttermost despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One that to him erewhile had prophesied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“The loathsome Harpies should his daily fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leave unpolluted only, when astride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of winged horse, arriving through the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An armed cavalier should be descried.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for impossible appears the thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Devoid of hope remains the mournful king.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now that with wonderment his followers spy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The English cavalier so make his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’er every wall, o’er every turret high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some swiftly to the king the news convey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who calls to mind that ancient prophecy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And heedless of the staff, his wonted stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through joy, with outstretched arms and tottering feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Comes forth, the flying cavalier to meet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Within the castle court Astolpho flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there, with spacious wheels, on earth descended;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king, conducted by his courtly crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the warrior knelt, with arms extended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cried; “Thou angel send of God, thou new</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Messiah, if too sore I have offended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For mercy, yet, bethink thee, ’tis our bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sin, and thine to pardon who repent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Knowing my sin, I ask not, I, to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Such grace I dare not ask⁠—restored to light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For well I ween such power resides in thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Being accepted in thy Maker’s sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let it suffice, that I no longer see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor let me with perpetual hunger fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least, expel the harpies’ loathsome horde,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor let them more pollute my ravaged board;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And I to build thee, in my royal hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A holy temple, made of marble, swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all its portals and its roof of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And decked, within and out, with jewels rare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here shall thy mighty miracle be told</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In sculpture, and thy name the dome shall bear.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So spake the sightless king of Nubia’s reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sought to kiss the stranger’s feet in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nor angel”⁠—good Astolpho made reply⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Nor new Messiah, I from heaven descend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less a mortal and a sinner I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To such high grace unworthy to pretend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To slay the monsters I all means will try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or drive them from the realm which they offend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I shall prosper, be thy praises paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To God alone, who sent me to thine aid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Offer these vows to God, to him well due;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him thy churches build, thine altars rear.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discoursing so, together wend the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid barons bold, that king and cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Nubian prince commands the menial crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith to bring the hospitable cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hopes that now the foul, rapacious band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will not dare snatch the victual from his hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forthwith a solemn banquet they prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within the gorgeous palace of the king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seated alone here guest and sovereign are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the attendant troop the viands bring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold! a whizzing sound is heard in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which echoes with the beat of savage wing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold! the band of harpies thither flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lured by the scent of victual from the skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All bear a female face of pallid dye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seven in number are the horrid band;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Emaciated with hunger, lean, and dry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fouler than death; the pinions they expand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ragged, and huge, and shapeless to the eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The talon crook’d; rapacious is the hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fetid and large the paunch; in many a fold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like snake’s, their long and knotted tails are rolled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The fowls are heard in air; then swoops amain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The covey well nigh in that instant, rends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The food, o’erturns the vessels, and a rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of noisome ordure on the board descends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To stop their nostrils king and duke are fain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such an insufferable stench offends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the greedy birds, as wrath excites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho with his brandished faulchion smites.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At croup or collar now he aims his blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now strikes at neck or pinion; but on all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if he smote upon a bag of tow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The strokes without effect and languid fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while nor dish nor goblet they forego;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor void those ravening fowls the regal hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till they have feasted full, and left the food</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waste or polluted by their rapine rude.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That king had firmly hoped the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would from his royal seat the harpies scare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He now, that hope foregone, with nought to cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laments, and sighs, and groans in his despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his good horn remembers him the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose clangours helpful aye in peril are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deems his bugle were the fittest mean</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To free the monarch from those birds unclean;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And first to fill their ears, to king and train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With melted wax, Astolpho gives command;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That every one who hears the deafening strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May not in panic terror fly the land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He takes the reins, his courser backs again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grasps the enchanted bugle in his hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the sewer next signs to have the board</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anew with hospitable victual stored.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The meats he to an open galley bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other banquet spreads on other ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold, as wont, the harpy-squad appears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho quickly lifts the bugle’s round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (for unguarded are their harassed ears)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The harpies are not proof against the sound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In terror form the royal dome they speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor meat nor aught beside the monsters heed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>After them spurs in haste the valiant peer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the winged courser forth is flown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving beneath him, in his swift career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The royal castle and the crowded town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bugle ever pealing, far and near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The harpies fly toward the torrid zone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor light until they reach that loftiest mountain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where springs, if anywhere, Nile’s secret fountain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Almost at that aerial mountain’s feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deep under earth, extends a gloomy cell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The surest pass for him, as they repeat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That would at any time descend to hell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hither the predatory troop retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As a safe refuge from the deafening yell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As far, and farther than Cocytus’ shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descending, till that horn is heard no more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At that dark hellish inlet, which a way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Opens to him who would abandon light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The terrifying bugle ceased to bray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—The courser furled his wings and stopt his flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, ere Astolpho further I convey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Not to depart from my accustomed rite⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since on all sides the paper overflows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I shall conclude my canto and repose.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
