<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XLVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-46" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>After long search for good Rogero made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him Leon finds, and yields to him his prize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Informed of all⁠—already with that maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wives; already in her bosom lies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When thither he that Sarza’s sceptre swayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To infect such bliss with impious venom hies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But falls in combat; and, blaspheming loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Acheron descends his spirit proud.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>I, if my chart deceives me not, shall now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In little time behold the neighbouring shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So hope withal to pay my promised vow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To one, so long my guide through that wide roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of waters, where I feared, with troubled brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To scathe my bark or wander evermore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now, methinks⁠—yea, now I see the land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see the friendly port its arms expand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>A burst of joy, like thunder to my ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rumbles along the sea and rends the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I chiming bells, I shrilling trumpets hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Confounded with the people’s cheerful cry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now their forms, that swarm on either pier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the thick-crowded harbour, I descry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All seem rejoiced my task is smoothly done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I so long a course have safely run.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>What beauteous dames and sage, here welcome me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With them what cavaliers the shore adorn!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What friends! to whom I owe eternity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of thanks for their delight at my return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mamma, Ginevra, with the rest I see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Correggio’s seed, on the harbour’s furthest horn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Veronica de Gambara is here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Phoebus and the Aonian choir so dear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>With Julia, a new Ginevra is in sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another offset from the selfsame tree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hippolita Sforza, and Trivultia bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bred in the sacred cavern, I with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Emilia Pia, and thee, Margherite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angela Borgia, Graziosa, see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fair Richarda d’Este, Lo! the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blanche and Diana, with their sister train!</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>Beauteous, but wiser and more chaste than fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I Barbara Turca, linked with Laura, know:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor beams the sun upon a better pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twixt Ind and where the Moorish waters flow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold Ginevra! that rich gem and rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which gilds the house of Malatesta so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That never worthier or more honoured thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Adorned the dome of Keysar or of king.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>If she had dwelt in Rimini of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time, from conquered Gaul returning home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Julius stood fearing on the river-shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To ford the stream and make a foe of Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He every banner would have bowed before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That dame, discharged his trophies, and such doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such pact would have received as liked her best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And haply ne’er had Freedom been opprest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>The consort of my lord of Bozzolo</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold! the mother, sisters, cousinhood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Them of Torello, Bentivoglio,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pallavigini’s and Visconti’s brood!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! she to whom all living dames forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The palm, and all of Grecian, Latin blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or barbarous, all that ever were, whose name</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For grace and beauty most is noised by Fame;</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Julia Gonzaga, she that wheresoe’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She moves, where’er she turns her lucid eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only is in charms without a peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But seems a goddess lighted from the skies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her is paired her brother’s wife, who ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swerved from her plighted faith⁠—aye good and wise⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because ill Fortune bore her long despite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! Arragonian Anna, Vasto’s light!</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>Anne gentle, courteous, and as sage as fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Temple of Love and Truth and Chastity:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her, her sister dims all beauty, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her radiance shines. Lo! one that hath set free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her conquering lord from Orcus’ dark repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him in spite of death and destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Beyond all modern instance) raised on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To shine with endless glory in the sky.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>My ladies of Ferrara, those of gay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Urbino’s court are here; and I descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mantua’s dames, and all that fair array</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Lombardy and Tuscan town supply.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavalier amid that band, whom they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So honour, unless dazzled is mine eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By those fair faces, is the shining light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his Arezzo, and Accolti hight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>Adorned with scarlet hat, and scarlet pall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His nephew Benedict, lo! there I see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him Campeggio and Mantua’s cardinal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Glory and light of the consistory;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (if I dote not) mark how one and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In face and gesture show such mighty glee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At my return, no easy task ’twould seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So vast an obligation to redeem.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>With them Lactantius is, Claude Ptolemy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trissino, Pansa, and Capilupi mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Latino Giovenal, it seems to me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sasso, and Molza, and Florian hight Montine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him, by whom through shorter pathway we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are led to the Ascraean font divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Julio Camillo; and meseems that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Berna, and Sanga, and Flaminio spy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Lo! Alexander of Farnese, and O</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Learned company that follows in his train!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Phaedro, Cappella, Maddalen’, Portio,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surnamed the Bolognese, the Volterrane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blosio, Pierio, Vida, famed for flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of lofty eloquence of exhaustless vein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mussuro, Lascari, and Navagero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Andrew Maro, and the monk Severo.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Lo! two more Alexanders! of the tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the Orologi one, and one Guarino:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mario d’ Olvito, and of royalty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That scourge, divine Pietro Aretino.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I two Girolamos amid them see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Veritade and the Cittadino;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See the Mainardo, the Leoniceno,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Panizzato, Celio, and Teocreno.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>Bernardo Capel, Peter Bembo here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see, through whom our pure, sweet idiom rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who, of vulgar usage winnowed clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its genuine form in his example shows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold an Obyson, that in his rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Admires the pains which he so well bestows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I Fracastoro, Bevezzano note,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Tryphon Gabriel, Tasso more remote.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Upon me Nicholas Tiepoli</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Nicholas Ammanio fix their eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Anthony Fulgoso, who to spy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My boat near land shows pleasure and surprise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There, from those dames apart, my Valery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stands with Barignan, haply to devise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him how, evermore by woman harmed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By her he shall not evermore be charmed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Of high and superhuman genius, tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By love and blood, lo! Pico and Pio true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He that approaches at the kinsmen’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—So honoured by the best⁠—I never knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, if by certain tokens signified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He is the man I so desire to view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Sannazaro, who persuades the nine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To leave their fountain for the foaming brine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Diligent, faithful secretary, lo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The learned Pistophilus, mine Angiar here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the Acciajuoli their joint pleasure show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That for my bark there is no further fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There I my kinsman Malaguzzo know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mighty hope from Adoardo hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That these my nest-notes shall by friendly wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be blown from Calpe’s rock to furthest Ind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Joys Victor Fausto; Tancred joys to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My sail; and with them joy a hundred more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Women and men I see, a mingled crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At my return rejoicing, crowd the shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, since the wind blows fair, nor much to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remains, let me my course delay no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And turning to Melissa, in what way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She rescued good Rogero let me say.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>Much bent was this Melissa (as I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I many times have said to you whilere)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Bradamant in wedlock should bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her hand upon the youthful cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so at heart had either’s weal and woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she from hour to hour of them would hear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence ever on that quest she spirits sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One still returning as the other went.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>A prey to deep and stubborn grief, reclined</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid gloomy shades Rogero they descried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Firm not to swallow food of any kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor from that purpose to be turned aside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so to die of hunger he designed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But weird Melissa speedy aid supplied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who took a road, from home forth issuing, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She met the Grecian emperor’s youthful heir;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Leo that, one by one, dispatched his train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of followers, far and wide, through every bourn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And afterwards, in person went in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To find the warrior of the unicorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wise enchantress, that will sell and rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had on that day equipt a demon, borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him, in likeness of a hackney horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Constantine’s son encountered in her course.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“If such as your ingenuous mien” (she cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Leo) “is your soul’s nobility,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And corresponding with your fair outside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your inward goodness and your courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some help, some comfort, sir, for one provide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In whom the best of living knights we see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, save ye help and comfort quickly lend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is little distant from his latter end.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“The best of knights will die of all, who don,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or e’er donned sword and buckler, the most fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gentle of all warriors that are gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or who throughout the world yet living are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And simply for a courteous deed, if none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall comfort to the youthful sufferer bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then come, sir, for the love of Heaven, and try</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If any counsel succour may supply.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>It suddenly came into Leo’s mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight of whom she parlayed was that same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom throughout all the land he sought to find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seeking whom, he now in person came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that obeying her that would persuade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such pious work, he spurred behind the dame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thither led (nor tedious was the way)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where nigh reduced to death the stripling lay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>They found Rogero fasting from all food</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For three long days, so broken down; with pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight could but upon his feet have stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fall, albeit unpushed, to ground again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With helm on head, and with his faulchion good</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Begirt, he lay reclined in plate and chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A pillow of his buckler had he made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the white unicorn was seen pourtraid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>There thinking what an injury he had done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his lady love⁠—how ingrate, how untrue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her had been⁠—not simple grief alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’erwhelmed him, to such height his fury grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bit his hands and lips; while pouring down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His cheeks, the tears unceasing ran, and through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The passion that so wrapt his troubled sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Leo nor Melissa heard the knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor therefore interrupts he his lament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor checks his sighs, nor checks his trickling tears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Young Leo halts, to hear his speech intent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lights from his courser, and towards him steers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He knows that of the sorrows which torment</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love is the cause; but yet from nought appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who is the person that such grief hath bred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For by Rogero this remains unsaid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Approaching nearer and yet nearer, now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fronts the weeping warrior, face to face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Greets with a brother’s love, and stooping low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His neck encircles with a fast embrace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the lamenting Child I know not how</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is liked his sudden presence in that place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who fears annoy or trouble at his hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lest he should his wish for death withstand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Him with the sweetest words young Leo plied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the warmest love that he could show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Let it not irk thee,” to the Child he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“To tell the cause from whence thy sorrows flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For few such desperate evils man betide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that there is deliverance from his woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that the cause be known; nor he bereft</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of hope should ever be, so life be left.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Much grieve I thou wouldst hide thyself from me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That known me for thy faithful friend and true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only now I am so bound to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I the knot can never more undo;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But even from the beginning, when to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy deadly foeman I had reason due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hope then that I will succour thee with pelf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With friends, with following, and with life itself.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Nor shun to me thy sorrow to explain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I beseech thee leave to me to try</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If wealth avail to free thee from thy pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Art, cunning, open force, or flattery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If my assistance is employed in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The last relief remains to thee to die:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But be content awhile this deed to shun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till all that thou canst do shall first be done.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He said; and with such forceful prayer appealed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So gently and benignly soothed his moan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That good Rogero could not choose but yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose heart was not of iron or of stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who deemed, unless he now his lips unsealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He should a foul discourteous deed have done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fain would have replied, but made assay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet twice or thrice, ere words could find their way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“My lord, when known for what I am (and me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now shalt thou know),” he made at last reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I wot thou, like myself, content wilt be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And haply more content, that I should die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Know me for him so hated once by thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero who repaid that hate am I;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now ’tis many days since with intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of putting thee to death from court I went.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Because I would not see my promised bride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Borne off by thee; in that Duke Aymon’s love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And favour was engaged upon thy side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, for man purposes, and God above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disposes, thy great courtesy, well tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a sore need, my fixt resolve did move.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor only I renounced the hate I bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But purposed to be thine for evermore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“What time I as Rogero was unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou madest suit I would obtain for thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Lady Bradamant; which was all one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to demand my heart and soul from me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether thy wish I rather than mine own</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sought to content, thou hast been made to see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thine is the lady; her in peace possess;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far more than mine I prize thy happiness.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Content thee, that deprived of her, as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I should myself of worthless life deprive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For better I without a soul could dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than without Bradamant remain alive.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And never while these veins with life-blood swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Canst thou with her legitimately wive:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For vows erewhile have been between us said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor she at once can with two husbands wed.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>So filled is gentle Leo with amaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he the stranger for Rogero knows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With lips and brow unmoved, with stedfast gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rooted feet, he like a statue shows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like statue more than man, which votaries raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In churches, for acquittance of their vows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He deems that courtesy of so high a strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was never done nor will be done again;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And that he him doth for Rogero know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only that goodwill he bore whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abates not, but augments his kindness so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That no less grieves the Grecian cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than good Rogero for Rogero’s woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this, as well as that he will appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deservedly an emperor’s son⁠—although</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In other things outdone⁠—he will not be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Defeated in the race of courtesy;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>And says, “That day my host was overthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, by thy wond’rous valour, though</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I had thee at despite, if I had known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou was Rogero, as I know it now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So me thy virtue would have made thine own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As then it made me, knowing not my foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So hatred from my bosom would have chased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with my present love have straight replaced.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>“That I Rogero hated, ere I knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou was Rogero, will I not deny.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But think not that I further would pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hatred that I bore thee; and had I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When thee I from thy darksome dungeon drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descried the truth, as this I now descry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such treatment shouldst thou then have had, as thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shalt have from me, to thine advantage, now;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And if I willingly had done so then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When not, as I am now, obliged to thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How much more gladly should I now; and when,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not doing so, I should with reason be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deemed most ungrateful amid ingrate men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since thou foregoest thine every good for me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I to thee restore thy gift, and, more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Glady than I received it, this restore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The damsel more to thee than me is due;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And though for her deserts I hold her dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If that fair prize some happier mortal drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I think not I my vital thread should shear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would I by thy death be free to woo:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That from the hallowed bands of wedlock clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein the lady hath to thee been tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I might possess her as my lawful bride.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Not only Bradamant would I forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But whatsoe’er I in the world possess;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rather forfeit life than ever know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That grief, through me, should such a knight oppress.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To me is thy distrust great cause of woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That since thou couldst dispose of me no less</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than of thyself, thou⁠—rather than apply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To me for succour⁠—wouldst of sorrow die.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>These words he spake, and more to that intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too tedious in these verses to recite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Refuting evermore such argument</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As might be used in answer by the knight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who said, at last, “I yield, and am content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To live; but how can I ever requite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The obligation, which by me is owed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To thee that twice hast life on me bestowed?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Melissa generous wine and goodly cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither bade carry, in a thought obeyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And comforted the mourning cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would have sunk without her friendly aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile the sound of steeds Frontino’s ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had reached, and thither had he quickly made:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him Leo’s squires at his commandment caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saddled, and to good Rogero brought;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Who, though by Leo helped, with much ado</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And labour sore the gentle courser scaled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So wasted was the vigour which some few</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Short days before, in fighting field, availed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To overthrow a banded host, and do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The deeds he did, in cheating armour mailed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Departing thence, ere they had measured more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than half a league, they reached an abbey hoar:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Wherein what of that day was yet unworn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They past, the morrow, and succeeding day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until the warrior of the unicorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His vigour had recruited by the stay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, Leo, and Melissa then return</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Charles’s royal residence; where lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An embassy, arrived the eve before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from the Bulgars’ land a message bore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Since they that had for king proclaimed the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besought Rogero thither to repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through these their envoys deeming they would light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On him in Charles’s court, where they should swear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fidelity, and yield to him his right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he from them the crown receive and wear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero’s squire who served this band to steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has published tidings of the cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>He of the fight has told which at Belgrade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile Rogero for the Bulgars won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How Leo and his sire were overlaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all their army slaughtered and undone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherefore the Bulgars him their king had made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their royal line excluding from the throne:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then how Ungiardo took the warrior brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him to cruel Theodora gave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>He speaks with that of certain news, which say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How good Rogero’s jailer was found dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prison broke and prisoner away:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of what became of him was nothing said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Towards the city by a secret way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Nor was his visage seen) Rogero sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, on the following morning, and his friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leo, to Charles’s court together wend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>To Charles’ court he wends; the bird he bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of gold with its two heads⁠—of crimson hue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its field⁠—and that same vest and ensigns wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As was erewhile devised between the two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such as in the listed fight before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His bruised and battered armour was in shew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that they quickly knew the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From him that strove with Bradamant whilere.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>In royal ornaments and costly gown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unarmed, beside him doth young Leo fare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A worthy following and of high renown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before, behind him, and about him are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bowed to Charlemagne, who from his throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had risen to do honour to the pair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then holding still Rogero by the hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So spake, while all that warrior closely scanned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Behold the champion good, that did maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From dawn till fall of day the furious fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And since by Bradamant nor taken, slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor forced beyond the barriers was the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He is assured his victory is plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dread sir, if he your edict reads aright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he hath won the lady for his wife:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So comes to claim the guerdon of the strife.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Besides that by your edict’s tenor none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But him can to the damsel lift his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Is she deserved by deeds of valour done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What other is so worthy of the prize?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Should she by him that loves her best be won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None passes him, nor with the warrior vies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he is here to fight against all foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That would in arms his right in her oppose.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>King Charlemagne and all his peerage stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amazed, who well believed the Grecian peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Bradamant had striven with lifted brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fight, and not that unknown cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa, thither borne amid the band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That crowded round the royal chair to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hardly till Leo made an ending staid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then prest before the listening troop, and said:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Since here Rogero is not, to contest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bride’s possession with the stranger knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest he, as undefended, be opprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And forfeit so without dispute his right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On his behalf I undertake this quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—His sister I⁠—against whatever wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall here assert a claim to Bradamant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or more desert than good Rogero vaunt.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She spake this with such anger and disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many surmised amid the assistant crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, without waiting leave from Charlemagne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What she had threatened she forthwith would do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No longer Leo deemed it time to feign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from Rogero’s head the helm withdrew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to Marphisa, “For himself to speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold him here and ready!” cried the Greek.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>As looked old Aegeus at the accursed board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing it was his son to whom⁠—so willed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His wicked consort⁠—that Athenian lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had given the juice from deadly drugs distilled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he, if he had recognized his sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though but a little later, would have killed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So looked Marphisa when, disclosed to view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She in the stranger knight Rogero knew;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>And ran forthwith to clip the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor could unclasp her arms: with loving show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charlemagne, Roland, and Rinaldo, here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there, fix friendly kisses on his brow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor him Sir Dudon, nor Sir Olivier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor King Sobrino can caress enow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor paladin nor peer, amid the crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wearies of welcoming that warrior true.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Leo, who well can play the spokesman, now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That warlike band hath ceased to clip the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tells before Charles and all that audience, how</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero’s daring, how Rogero’s might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Albeit to his good squadron’s scathe and woe⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which at Belgrade he witnessed in that fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So moved him that they overweighed all harms</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflicted on him by the warrior’s arms.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>So that to her Rogero being brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would all havoc of the youth have made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He setting all his family at nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had out of durance vile the knight conveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how Rogero, that the rescue wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Leo might be worthily repaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did that high courtesy; which can by none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ever were or e’er will be, outdone;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And he from point to point continuing, said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That which Rogero had for him achieved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And after, how by sorrow sore bested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that to leave his cherished wife he grieved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had resolved to die, and, almost dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was only by his timely aid relieved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this he told so movingly, no eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remained, amid those martial many, dry.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>So efficaciously he after prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the obstinate Duke Aymon, not alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stubborn sire of Bradamant he swayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to forego his settled purpose won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that proud lord in person did persuade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To beg Rogero’s pardon, and his son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And son-in-law to be beseech the knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus to him his Bradamant was plight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>To her, where, of her feeble life in doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She in a secret chamber made lament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through many a messenger, with joyful shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mickle haste, the happy tidings went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence the warm blood, that stagnated about</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her heart, by her first sorrow thither sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ebbed at this notice in so full a tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well nigh for sudden joy the damsel died.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Of all her vigour is she so foregone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She cannot on her feeble feet rely:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet what her force must needs to you be known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what the damsel’s magnanimity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None doomed to prison, wheel or halter, none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Condemned some other evil death to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About whose brows the sable band is tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rejoices more to hear his pardon cried.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Joys Clermont’s, joys Mongrana’s noble house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those kindred branches that fresh know to view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With equal grief Count Anselm overflows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gan, Falcon, Gini and Ginami’s crew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet they meanwhile beneath contented brows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conceal the dark and envious thoughts they brew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the fox waits the motions of the hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They wait their time for vengeance, and forbear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Besides that oftentimes before the rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Roland and Rinaldo on them fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though they were calmed by Charles’s counsel sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And common danger from the infidel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They had new cause for grief in Bertolage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slain by their foemen and Sir Pinnabel:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But they concealed their hatred, and endured</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those griefs, as of the matter ill assured.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Those envoys of the Bulgars that had made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Charles’s court (as hath erewhile been shown),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping to find the knight, whose shield pourtrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The unicorn, elected to their throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bless the good fortune which their hope repayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing that valiant warrior, and fall down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before his feet, and him in humble speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again to seek their Bulgary beseech;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Where kept for him in Adrianople are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sceptre and the crown, his royal due:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But let him succour to his kingdom bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For⁠—to their further scathe⁠—advices shew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Constantine doth a mighty host prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thitherward in person moves anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they⁠—of their elected king possest⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hope the Greek empire from his hands to wrest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>He accepts the realm, by their entreaties won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, to afford them aid against their foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will went to Bulgary when three months are done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save Fortune otherwise of him dispose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When this is heard by that Greek emperor’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bids Rogero on his faith repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For since by him the Bulgar’s realm is swayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Peace between them and Constantine is made;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor needeth he depart in haste, to guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His Bulgar bands against the Grecian foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all that he had conquered far and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will persuade his father to forego.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None of the virtues, in Rogero spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moved Bradamant’s ambitious mother so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or so to endear her son-in-law availed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As hearing now that son a sovereign hailed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The rich and royal nuptials they prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well befits him, by whose care ’tis done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis done by Charles; and with such cost and care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if ’twere for a daughter of his own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such the merits of the damsel are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such had all her martial kindred shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charles would not think he should exceed due measure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If spent for her was half his kingdom’s treasure.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>He a free court bids cry; whither his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Securely every one that wills may wend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And offers open lists till the ninth day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whosoever would in arms contend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bids build bowers afield, and interlay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Green boughs therein, and flowers and foliage blend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make those bowers so gay with silk and gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No fairer place this ample world doth hold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Guested within fair Paris cannot be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The countless foreign bands that thither fare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, rich and poor, of high and low degree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Greeks and Latins and Barbarians are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is no end of lord and embassy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thither from all ends of earth repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All lodged conveniently, to their content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath pavilion, booth, and bower and tent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The weird Melissa against the coming night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With singular and matchless ornament</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had for that pair the nuptial chamber dight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereon long time before she had been bent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long time before desirous of the rite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had been that dame, presageful of the event;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Presageful of futurity, she knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What goodly fruit should from their stems ensue.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>She had prepared the genial, fruitful bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under a broad pavilion; one more rich,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Adorned, and jocund, never overhead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Did this for peace or war its master pitch)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was in the world, before or after, spread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this from Thracian strand had borne the witch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The costly prize from Constantine she bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for disport was tented on that shore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She with young Leo’s leave, or rather so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Grecian’s admiration to obtain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a rare token of that art to show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which on Hell’s mighty dragon puts the rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at her pleasure rules that impious foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Heaven, together with his evil train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bade demons the pavilion through mid air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Paris from Constantinople bear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>From Constantine that lay therein, who swayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Grecian empire’s sceptre, at mid-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This with its cordage, shaft whereby ’twas stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all within and out, she bore away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the costly tent, through air conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For young Rogero made a lodging gay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bridal ended, this her demon crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, from whence ’twas brought, conveyed anew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Two thousand tedious years were nigh complete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since this fair work was fashioned by the lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Trojan maid, warmed with prophetic heat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, ’mid long labour and ’mid vigil sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her own fingers all the storied sheet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the pavilion had embroidered o’er;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cassandra hight; that maid to Hector brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Her brother he) this costly present gave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The curtiest cavalier, the kindliest shoot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ever from her brother’s stock should grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Albeit she knew far distant from its root,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With many a branch between, should be that bough)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In silk and gold upon the gorgeous suit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of hangings had she wrought in goodly show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much prized that gift, while living, Priam’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For its rare work and her by whom ’twas done.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>But when by treachery perished Priam’s heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Greeks the Trojans scathed in cruel sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When her gates opened by false Sinon were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And direr ill was done than tales report,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This plunder fell to Menelaus’ share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith to Egypt’s land he made resort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There left it to King Proteus, Egypt’s lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In ransom for his prisoned wife restored;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She Helen hight: her Menelaus to free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Proteus the pavilion gave away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, passing through the line of Ptolemy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Cleopatra fell; from her in fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agrippa’s band on the Leucadian sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bore off the treasure, amid other prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Augustus and Tiberius heired the loom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kept till the time of Constantine in Rome:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>That Constantine, whom thou shall ever rue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair Italy, while the heavens above are rolled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Constantine to Byzantium, when he grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weary of Tyber, bore the tent of old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melissa from his namesake this withdrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its pole of ivory and its cord of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all its cloth with beauteous figures fraught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fairer Apelles’ pencil never wrought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Here the three Graces in gay vesture gowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assisted the delivery of a queen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not in four ages in this earthly round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was ever born a boy so fair of mien.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Jove, Venus, Mars, and Mercury renowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For fluent speech, about the child are seen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him have they strewed, and stew with heaven’s perfume,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ambrosial odours and aetherial bloom.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Hippolytus a little label said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inscribed upon the baby’s swaddling clothes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the hand him Fortune leads in age more staid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Valour as a guide before him goes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An unknown band in sweeping vest arraid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With long descending locks, the tapestry shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deputed by Corvinus to desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tender infant from his princely sire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>He reverently parts from Hercules’ side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From her, his lady mother, Eleanor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the Danube wends; where far and wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They meet the boy, and as a god adore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prudent king of Hungary is descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who does due honour to his ripened lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In yet unripe, yea, raw and tender years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ranks the stripling above all his peers.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>One is there that in his green age and new</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Places Strigonia’s crozier in his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him ever at Corvinus’ side we view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether he doth in court or camp command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether against the Turk, or German crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The puissant monarch leads his martial band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Watchful Hippolytus is at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gathers virtue from his generous guide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>There is it seen, how he his blooming age</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Divides mid arts and wholesome discipline:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The secret spirit of the ancient page</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There Fuscus well instructs him to divine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“This must thou shun, that follow”⁠—seems the sage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To say⁠—“if thou immortally wouldst shine.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fashioned withal with so much skill and care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By her who wrought that work, their gestures were.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>A cardinal he next is seen, though young</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In years, at council in the Vatican;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where for deep wisdom graced by eloquent tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With wonder him the assembled conclave scan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“What will he be”⁠—they seem to say among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Themselves⁠—“when he is ripened into man?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh! if on him <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s mantle fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What a blest aera! what a happy call!”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>That brave youth’s liberal pastimes are designed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In other place; on Alpine mountain hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here he affronts the bear of rugged kind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there in rushy bottom bays the boar:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now on his jennet he outgoes the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And drives some goat or gallant hind before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which falls o’ertaken on the dusty plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By his descending faulchion cleft in twain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>He is descried, amid a fair array</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of poets and philosophers elsewhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This pricks for him the wandering planets’ way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These earth, these heaven for his instruction square.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some chant sad elegies, some verses gay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lays lyric or heroic; singers there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with rich music hears; nor moves a pace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But what in every step is sovereign grace.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The first part of the storied walls pourtraied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That noble prince’s gentle infancy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cassandra all beside had overlaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With fears of justice, prudence, modesty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Valour, and that fifty virtue, which hath made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With those fair sisters closest amity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I speak of her that gives and that bestows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all these virtues gilt, the stripling glows.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>In this part is the princely youth espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that unhappy duke, the Insubri’s head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In peace they sit in council at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together armed, the serpent-banner spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youth by one unchanging faith is tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him for ever, well or ill bested;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His followers still in flight before the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His guide in peril, his support in woe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>Him in another quarter you descry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For his Ferrara and her duke in fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who by strange proofs doth sift, and certify</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his just brother, vouched by tokens clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The close device of that ill treachery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hatched by those kinsmen whom he held most dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence justly he becomes that title’s heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Rome yet free bade righteous Tully bear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Elsewhere in martial panoply he shone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hasting to help the church with lifted blade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With scanty and tumultuous levy gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against well-ordered host in arms arraid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lo! the coming of that chief alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Affords the priestly band such present aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extinguished are the fires before they spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He came, he saw, he conquered, may be said.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Elsewhere he stands upon his native strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fighting against the mightiest armament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That whensoever against Argive land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Turkish, from Venetian harbour went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scatters and overthrows the hostile band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And⁠—spoil and prisoners to his brother sent⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nothing reserves save that unfading bay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The only prize he cannot give away.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Upon those figures gazed the courtly crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But read no meaning in the storied wall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because there was not any one to shew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That these were things hereafter to befall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those fair and quaintly fashioned forms they view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With pleasure, and peruse the scrolls withal:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Bradamant, to whom the whole was known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By wise Melissa taught, rejoiced alone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Though not instructed in that history</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like gentle Bradamant, the affianced knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remembers how amid his progeny</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Atlantes often praised this Hippolyte.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Who faithfully could verse such courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Charlemagne vouchsafed to every wight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With various games that solemn feast was cheered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And charged with viands aye the board appeared.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>Who is a valiant knight, is here descried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For daily broke a thousand lances lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Singly to combat or in troops they ride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On horseback or afoot, they mix in fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthiest of all Rogero is espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who always conquers, jousting night and day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so, in wrestling, dance, and every deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still from its rivals bears away the meed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>On the last day, when at their festive cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was seated solemnly the assembled band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where at Charles’ left was placed the wedded peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Bradamant upon his better hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Across the fields an armed cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of semblance haughty, and of stature grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was seen to ride towards the royal table;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself and courser wholly clothed in sable.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>The King of Argier he; that for the scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Received from her, when on the bridge he fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never to clothe himself in arms had sworn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor draw the faulchion nor bestride the sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he had like an anchoret outworn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A year and month and day in lowly cell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So to chastise themselves for such like crimes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were cavaliers accustomed in those times.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Albeit of Charles and Agramant the Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had heard the several fortunes while away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not to foreswear himself, he armed no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than if in nought concerned in that affray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when the year and month were wholly o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wholly past was the succeeding day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With other courser, harness, sword, and lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king betook him to the court of France.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>He neither lighted from his horse, nor bowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His head; and, without sign of reverence due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His scorn for Charlemagne by gestures showed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the high presence of so fair a crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astound and full of wonder stood the crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such license in that haughty man to view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All leave their meat, all leave their talk, to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The purpose of the stranger cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>To Charles and to Rogero opposite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a loud voice, and in proud accent, “I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Am Rodomont of Sarza,” said the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Who thee, Rogero, to the field defy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here, before the sun withdraws his light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will prove on thee thine infidelity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that thou, as a traitor to thy lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deserv’st not any honour at this board.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Albeit thy felony be plain and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which thou, as christened, canst not disavow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nathless to make it yet more plain appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This will I prove upon thee; and, if thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Canst find a knight to combat for thee here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him will accept;⁠—if one be not enow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will four, nay six accept; and will maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My words against them all in listed plain.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero, with the leave of Pepin’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uprose at that appeal, and thus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he⁠—nor he alone⁠—but every one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thus impeached him as a traitor, lied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That so he by his king had ever done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him none could justly blame; and on his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He was prepared in listed field to shew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He evermore by him had done his due.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He can defend himself; nor need he crave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another warrior’s help that course to run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ’tis his hope to show him he would have</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enough, perhaps would have too much, of one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither Orlando and Rinaldo, brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Olivier, and his white and sable son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither good Dudon and Marphisa wend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who fain with that fierce paynim will contend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIX-->
			<p>
				<span>They tell Rogero that, as newly wed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The combat he in person should refuse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Take ye no further pains,” the warrior said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“For such would be for me a foul excuse.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Tartar’s arms were brought, which cut the thread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of more delay and of all further truce:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With spurs Orlando deck’d the youthful lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Charlemagne begirt him with the sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CX-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa and Bradamant in corslet case</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His breast, and clothe him in his other gear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho led his horse of noble race:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Dudon held his stirrup: far and near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo and Namus made the mob give place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assisted by the Marquis Olivier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All from the crowded lists they drive with speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Evermore kept in order for such need.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The pale-faced dames and damsels troop, in guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of pigeons round the lists, a timid show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, homeward bound, from fruitful field they rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scared by wide-sweeping winds, which loudly blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid flash and clap; and when the sable skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threat hail and rain, the harvest’s waste and woe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A timid troop, they for Rogero fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill matched they deem with that fierce cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXII-->
			<p>
				<span>So him deemed all the rabble; and so most</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those bold cavalier and barons thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that they had not yet the memory lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of what that paynim had in Paris wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When singly fire and sword the warrior tost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And much of that fair town to ruin brought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose signs remained, and yet will long remain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever greater havoc plagued that reign.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Bradamant’s heart above those others’ beat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that she deemed the Saracen in might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or valour which in the heart-core hath its seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was of more prowess than the youthful knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor (what oft gives success in martial feat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That with the paynim was the better right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet cannot she her some ill misgivings quell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But upon those that love such fear sits well.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Oh! in her fear for him, how willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She battle for Rogero would have done!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If lifeless on the listed field to lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surer than sure⁠—in fight with Ulien’s son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than one death would she consent to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she withal could suffer more than one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than she in that unhappy strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would see her cherished consort risk his life.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXV-->
			<p>
				<span>But prayer availed not on the damsel’s part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make Rogero leave to her the quest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She then with mournful face and beating heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood by to view that pair to fight addrest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From right and left the peer and paynim start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at each other run with lance in rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The spears seem ice, as they in shivers fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fragments birds, that mount through middle sky.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rodomont’s lance which smote in the career</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon mid-shield, yet harmed it little; so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perfect was famous Hector’s iron gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hardened by Vulcan’s hand, and safe from blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well against the shield his levelled spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero guides, and that good buckler⁠—though</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well steeled within and out, with bone between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And nigh a palm in thickness⁠—pierces clean;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And⁠—but his lance resists not that fierce shock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at the first assault its splinters fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bits and fragments of the shivered stock</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seem fledged with feathers they ascend so high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were his arms hewn from adamantine rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The spear would pierce the paynim’s panoply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And end that battle: but it breaks withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on their croups both staggering coursers fall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>With bridle and with spur the martial pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raise their proud horses nimbly from the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having broke their spears, with faulchions bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return, to bandy fierce and cruel wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wheeling with wondrous mastery, here and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bold and ready coursers in a round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warriors with their biting swords begin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To try where either’s armour is most thin.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Rodomont had not that hard dragon-hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which heretofore had cased the warrior’s breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Nimrod’s trenchant sword was at his side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor the accustomed helm his temples prest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For on that bridge which spanned the narrow tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A loser to Dordona’s lady, vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And arms suspended from the votive stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He left; as I, meseems, erewhile have shown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Clad was the king in other goodly mail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet not like that first panoply secure:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But neither this, nor that, nor harder scale</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could Balisarda’s deadly dint endure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against which neither workmanship avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enchantment, temper, nor prime steel and pure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So here so there Rogero plied his sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He more than once the paynim’s armour bored.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>When Rodomont beholds in that fierce close</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His widely crimsoned arms, nor can restrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The greater portion of those griding blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From biting to the quick, through plate and chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with more fury, with more rage o’erflows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than in mid winter the tempestrous main</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flings down his shield, and with both hands outright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lays at Rogero’s helm with all his might.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>With that excessive force, wherewith the gin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erected in two barges upon Po,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And raised by men and wheels, with deafening din</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descends upon the sharpened piles below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With all his might he smote the paladin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With either hand; was never direr blow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him the charmed helmet helped, or⁠—such its force⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stroke would have divided man and horse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As if about to fall, the youthful lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Twice nodded, opening legs and arms; anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont smote, in that he would afford</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His foe no time his spirits to renew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then threatened other stroke; but that fine sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bore not such hammering, and in shivers flew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the bold Saracen, bereft of brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was in the combat left with unarmed hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>But not for this doth Rodomont refrain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He swoops upon the Child, unheeding aught:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So sore astounded is Rogero’s brain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So wholly overclouded is his thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But him the paynim well awakes again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom by the neck he with strong arm has caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gripes and grapples with such mighty force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He falls on earth, pulled headlong from his horse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet leaps from earth as nimbly, moved by spleen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far less than shame; for on his gentle bride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He turned his eyes, and that fair face serene</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now troubled the disdainful warrior spied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She in sore doubt her champion’s fall had seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well nigh at that sight the lady died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, quickly to revenge the affront,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clutches his sword and faces Rodomont.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>He at Rogero rode, who that rude shock</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shunned warily, retiring from his ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as he past, the paynim’s bridle took</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his left had, and turned his courser round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While with his right he at his rider struck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he in belly, flank and breast would wound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And twice sore anguish felt the monarch, gored</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In flank and thigh, by good Rogero’s sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rodomont, grasping still in that close fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hilt and pommel of his broken blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Layed at Rogero’s helmet with such might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That him another stroke might have dismaid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But good Rogero, who should win of right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seizing his arm, the king so rudely swayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bringing his left his better hand to speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he pulled down the paynim from his steed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Through force or skill, so fell the Moorish lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He stood his match, I rather ought to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell on his feet; because Rogero’s sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gave him, ’twas deemed, advantage in the fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero stands aloof, with wary ward</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As fain to keep the paynim king at bay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the wise champion will not let a wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So talk and bulky close with him in fight;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero flank and thigh dyed red beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other wounds; and hoped he would have failed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By little and by little, as it welled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that he finally should have prevailed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His hilt and pommel in his fist yet held</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim, which with all his might he scaled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At young Rogero; whom he smote so sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stripling never was so stunned before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>In the helmet-cheek and shoulder-bone below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Child was smit, and left so sore astound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, tripping still and staggering to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarce kept himself from falling to the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont fain would close upon his foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But his foot fails him, weakened by the wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which pierced his thigh: he overtasked his might;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on his kneepan fell the paynim knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero lost no time, and with fierce blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote him in face and bosom with his brand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hammered, and held the Saracen so close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To ground he bore that champion with his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he so stirred himself, again he rose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He gripes Rogero so, fast locked they stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seconding their huge vigour by address,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They circle one another, shake, and press.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>His wounded thigh and gaping flank had sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weakened the vigour of the Moorish king:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero had address; had mickle lore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was greatly practised in the wrestlers’ ring:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He marked his vantage, nor from strife forbore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, where he saw the blood most freely spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where most wounded was the warrior, prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim with his feet, his arms, and breast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rodomont filled with spite and rage, his foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Takes by the neck and shoulders, and now bends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards him, and now pushes from him; now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raises from earth, and on his chest suspends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whirls here and there and grapples; and to throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stripling sorely in that strife contends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Collected in himself, Rogero wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To keep his vantage taxing strength and thought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>So shifting oft his hold, about the Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His arms the good and bold Rogero wound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against his left flank shoved his breast, and sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strained him with all his strength engirdled round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At once he past his better leg before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont’s knees and pushed, and from the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uplifted high in air the Moorish lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then hurled him down head foremost on the sward.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Such was the shock wherewith King Rodomont</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With battered head and spine the champion smote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, issuing from his wounds as from a font,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Streams of red blood the crimsoned herbage float.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, holding Fortune by the front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest he should rise, with one hand griped his throat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With one a dagger at his eyes addrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with his knees the paynim’s belly prest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>As sometimes where they work the golden vein</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within Pannonian or Iberian cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In unexpected ruin whelm the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By impious avarice there condemned to slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So with the load they lie opprest, with pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A passage can their prisoned spirit have:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less opprest the doughty paynim lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pinned to the ground in that disastrous fray.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero at his vizor doth present</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His naked poniard’s point, with threatening cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he will slay him, save he yields, content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To let him live, if he for grace apply.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Rodomont, who rather than be shent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the least deed of shame, preferred to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Writhed, struggled, and with all his vigour tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To pull Rogero down, and nought replied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As mastiff that below the deer-hound lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fixed by the gullet fast, with holding bite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sorely bestirs himself and vainly tries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With lips besmeared with foam and eyes alight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cannot from beneath the conqueror rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who foils his foe by force, and not despite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So vainly strives the monarch of Argier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rise from underneath the cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet Rodomont so twists and strives, he gains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The freedom of his better arm anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the right hand, which his poniard strains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he had drawn his deadly dagger too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would wound Rogero underneath the reins:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now the wary youth the error knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through which he might have died, by his delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That impious Saracen forthwith to slay;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXL-->
			<p>
				<span>And smiting twice or thrice his horrid front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raising as high as he could raise in air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His dagger, buried it in Rodomont;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And freed himself withal from further care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loosed from the more than icy corse, to font</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fetid Acheron, and hell’s foul repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The indignant spirit fled, blaspheming loud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile on earth so haughty and so proud.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
