<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>A hermit parts, by means of hollow sprite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The two redoubted rivals’ dangerous play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rinaldo goes where Love and Hope invite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But is dispatched by Charles another way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bradamont, seeking her devoted knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The good Rogero, nigh becomes the prey</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Pinabel, who drops the damsel brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the dungeon of a living grave.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Injurious love, why still to mar accord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between desires has been thy favourite feat?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why does it please thee so, perfidious lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two hearts should with a different measure beat?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou wilt not let me take the certain ford,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dragging me where the stream is deep and fleet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her I abandon who my love desires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While she who hates, respect and love inspires.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Thou to Rinaldo show’st the damsel fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While he seems hideous to that gentle dame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, who when the lady’s pride and care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Paid back with deepest hate her amorous flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now pines, himself, the victim of despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scorned in his turn, and his reward the same.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the changed damsel in such sort abhorred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She would choose death before that hated lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>He to the Pagan cries: “Forego thy theft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And down, false felon, from that pilfer’d steed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am not wont to let my own be reft.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he who seeks it dearly pays the deed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More⁠—I shall take from thee yon lovely weft;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To leave thee such a prize were foul misdeed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And horse and maid, whose worth outstrips belief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were ill, methinks, relinquished to a thief.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Thou liest,” the haughty Saracen retorts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As proud, and burning with as fierce a flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“A thief thyself, if Fame the truth reports:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But let good deeds decide our dubious claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With whom the steed or damsel fair assorts:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Best proved by valiant deeds: though, for the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That nothing is so precious, I with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Search the wide world throughout) may well agree.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>As two fierce dogs will somtimes stand at gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom hate or other springs of strife inspire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grind their teeth, while each his foe surveys</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sidelong glance and eyes more red than fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then either falls to bites, and hoarsely bays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While their stiff bristles stand on end with ire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So from reproach and menace to the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pass Sacripant and Clermont’s angry lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>Thus kindling into wrath the knights engage:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One is on foot, the other on his horse:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Small gain to this; for inexperienced page</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would better rein his charger in the course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such Baiardo’s sense, he will not wage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">War with his master, or put out his force.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For voice, nor hand, nor manage, will he stir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rebellious to the rein or goading spur.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>He, when the king would urge him, takes the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or, when he curbs him, runs in giddy rings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And drops his head beneath his spreading chest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And plays his spine, and runs an-end and flings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now the furious Saracen distressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sees ’tis no time to tame the beast, and springs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With one hand on the pummel, to the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clear of the restless courser at a bound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As soon as Sacripant, with well-timed leap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is from the fury of Bayardo freed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You may believe the battle does not sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between those champions, matched in heart and deed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their sounding blades such changeful measure keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hammer-strokes of Vulcan with less speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descend in that dim cavern, where he heats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Jove’s red thunders on his anvil beats.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>Sometimes they lunge, then feign the thrust and parry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deep masters of the desperate game they play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or rise upon the furious stroke, and carry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their swords aloft, or stoop and stand at bay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again they close, again exhausted tarry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now hide, now show themselves, and now give way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where one knight an inch of ground has granted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His foeman’s foot upon that inch is planted.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>When, lo! Rinaldo, now impatient grown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strikes full at Sacripant with lifted blade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he puts forth his buckler made of bone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well with strong and stubborn steel inlaid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though passing thick, Fusberta cleaves it: groan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Greenwood, and covert close, and sunny glade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim’s arm rings senseless with the blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And steel and bone, like ice, in shivers go.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>When the fair damsel saw, with timid eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such ruin follow from the faulchion’s sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, like the criminal, whose doom is nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Changed her fair countenance through sore dismay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deemed that little time was left to fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she would not be that Rinaldo’s prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo loathed by her as much, as he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doats on the scornful damsel miserably.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>So turned her horse into the gloomy chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And drove him through rough path and tangled ally</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oftentimes bent back her bloodless face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw Rinaldo from each thicket sally.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor flying long had urged the frantic race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before she met a hermit in a valley.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Devotion in his aspect was expressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his long beard descended on his breast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Wasted he was as much by fasts as age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on an ass was mounted, slow and sure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His visage warranted that never sage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had conscience more precise or passing pure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though in his arteries time had stilled the rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of blood, and spake him feeble and demure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At sight of the delighted damsel, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was inly stirred for very charity.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The lady prayed that kindly friar, that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would straight conduct her to some haven near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that she from the land of France might flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And never more of loathed Rinaldo hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hermit, who was skilled in sorcery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ceased not to soothe the gentle damsel’s fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the promise of deliverance, shook</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His pocket, and drew forth a secret book.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>This opened, quick and mighty marvel wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For not a leaf is finished by the sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before a spirit, by his bidding brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waits his command in likeness of a page:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, by the magic writ constrained and taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hastes where the warriors face to face engage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the cool shade⁠—but not in cool disport⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And steps between, and stops their battle short.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“In courtesy,” he cried, “let either show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What his foe’s death to either can avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what the guerdon conquest will bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On him who in the battle shall prevail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If Roland, though he has not struck a blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or snapt in fight a single link of mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Paris-town conveys the damsel gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who has engaged you in this bitter fray.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Within an easy mile I saw the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pricking to Paris with that lady bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Riding, in merry mood, with laugh and jeer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mocking at your fierce and fruitless fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sure it were better, while they yet are near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To follow peer and damsel in their flight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For should he once in Paris place his prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady never more shall meet your eyes.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>You might have seen those angry cavaliers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Change at the demon’s tale for rage and shame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And curse themselves as wanting eyes and ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To let their rival cheat them of the dame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards his horse the good Rinaldo steers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Breathing forth piteous sighs which seem of flame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if he joins Orlando⁠—ere they part⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swears in his fury he will have his heart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>So, passing where the prompt Bayardo stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaps on his back, and leaves, as swift as wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without farewell, his rival in the wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much less invites him to a seat behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The goaded charger, in his heat of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forces whate’er his eager course confined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ditch, river, tangled thorn, or marble block;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He swims the river, and he clears the rock.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>Let it not, sir, sound strangely in your ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo took the steed thus readily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So long and vainly followed far and near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he, endued with reasoning faculty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had not in vice lured on the following peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But fled before his cherished lord, that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might guide him whither went the gentle dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For whom, as he had heard, he nursed a flame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>For when Angelica, in random dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the pavilion winged her rapid flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bayardo marked the damsel as she fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His saddle lightened of Mount Alban’s knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who then on foot an equal combat sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Matched with a baron of no meaner might;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And chased the maid by woods, and floods, and strands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In hopes to place her in the warrior’s hands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>And, with desire to bring him to the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gallopped before him still with rampant play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But would not let his master mount, afraid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he might make him take another way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So luring on Rinaldo through the shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Twice brought him to his unexpected prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Twice foiled in his endeavour: once by bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ferrau; then Sacripant, as lately told.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Now good Bayardo had believed the tiding</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that fair damsel, which produced the accord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the devil’s cunning tale confiding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Renewed his wonted service to his lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold Rinaldo then in fury riding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pushing still his courser Paris-ward!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though he fly fast, the champion’s wishes go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faster; and wind itself had seemed too slow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>At night Rinaldo rests his steed, with pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To meet Anglante’s lord he burned so sore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lent such credit to the tidings vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the false courier of that wizard hoar:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that day and the next, with flowing rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rode, till the royal city rose before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His eyes; where Charlemagne had taken post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the sad remnant of his broken host.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>He, for he fears the Afric king’s pursuit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sap and siege, upon his vassals calls</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To gather in fresh victual, and recruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cleanse their ditches, and repair their walls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what may best annoy the foes, and suit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For safety, without more delay forestalls;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And plans an embassy to England, thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To gather fresher forces for defence.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>For he is bent again to try the fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of arms in tented field, though lately shamed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And send Rinaldo to the neighbouring state</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Britain, which was after England named.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill liked the Paladin to cross the strait;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that the people or the land he blamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that King Charles was sudden; nor a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would grant the valiant envoy for delay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rinaldo never executed thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less willingly, prevented in his quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that fair visage he was following,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose charms his heart had ravished from his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet, in obediance to the christian king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prepared himself to do the royal hest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Calais the good envoy wends with speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the same day embarks himself and steed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And there, in scorn of cautious pilot’s skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Such his impatience to regain his home),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Launched on the doubtful sea, which boded ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rolled its heavy billows, white with foam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wind, enraged that he opposed his will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stirred up the waves; and, ‘mid the gathering gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So the loud storm and tempest’s fury grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That topmast-high the flashing waters flew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The watchful mariners, in wary sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haul down the mainsail, and attempt to wear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would put back in panic to the port,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence, in ill hour, they loosed with little care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Not so,” exclaims the wind, and stops them short,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“So poor a penance will not pay the dare.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when they fain would veer, with fiercer roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pelts back their reeling prow and blusters more.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Starboard and larboard bears the fitful gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And never for a thought its ire assuages;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the strained vessel drives with humble sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the billows, as the tempest rages.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I, who still pursue a varying tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must leave awhile the Paladin, who wages</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A weary warfare with the wind and flood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To follow a fair virgin of his blood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>I speak of that famed damsel, by whose spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’erthrown, King Sacripant on earth was flung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The worthy sister of the valiant peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Beatrix and good Duke Aymon sprung.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By daring deeds and puissance no less dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Charlemagne and France: Since proved among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first, her prowess, tried by many a test,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equal to good Rinaldo’s shone confessed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>A cavalier was suitor to the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who out of Afric passed with Agramant;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero was his valiant father’s name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His mother was the child of Agolant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she, who not of bear or lion came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disdained not on the Child her love to plant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though cruel Fortune, ill their wishes meeting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had granted to the pair a single greeting.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Alone thenceforth she sought her lover (he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was named of him to whom he owed his birth),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And roved as safe as if in company</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of thousands, trusting in her single worth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She having made the king of Circassy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Salute the visage of old mother earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Traversed a wood, and that wood past, a mountain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stopt at length beside a lovely fountain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Through a delicious mead the fountain-rill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By ancient trees o’ershaded, glides away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him whose ear its pleasing murmurs fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Invites to drink, and on its banks to stay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the left side a cultivated hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Excludes the fervors of the middle day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As first the damsel thither turns her eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A youthful cavalier she seated spies;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>A cavalier, who underneath the shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seems lost, as in a melancholy dream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the bank, which gaudy flowers displayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reposing, overhangs the crystal stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His horse beneath a spreading beech is laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from a bough the shield and helmet gleam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While his moist eyes, and sad and downcast air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Speak him the broken victim of despair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Urged by the passion lodged in every breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A restless curiosity to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of others’ cares, the gentle maid addressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight, and sought the occasion of his woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he to her his secret grief confessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Won by her gentle speech and courteous show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by that gallant bearing, which at sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prepared who saw her for nimble knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Fair sir, a band of horse and foot,” he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I brought to Charlemagne; and thither pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he an ambush for Marsilius spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descending from the Pyrenean crest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in my company a damsel led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose charms with fervid love had fired my breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, as we journey by Rhone’s current, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A rider on a winged courser spy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The robber, whether he were man or shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or goblin damned to everlasting woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as he beheld my dear-loved maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like falcon, who, descending, aims its blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sank in a thought and rose; and soaring, laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hands on his prize, and snatched her from below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So quick the rape, that all appeared a dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until I heard in air the damsel’s scream.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“The ravening kite so swoops and plunders, when</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hovering above the shelterd yard, she spies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A helpless chicken near unwatchful hen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who vainly dins the thief with after cries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I cannot reach the mountain-robber’s den,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Compassed with cliffs, or follow one who flies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besides, way-foundered is my weary steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who ‘mid these rocks has wasted wind and speed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>“But I, like one who from his bleeding side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would liefer far have seen his heart out-torn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left my good squadrons masterless, to ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Along the cliffs, and passes least forlorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And took the way (love served me for a guide)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where it appeared the ruthless thief had born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ascending to his den, the lovely prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time he snatched my hope and peace away.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Six days I rode, from morn to setting sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By horrid cliff, by bottom dark and drear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And giddy precipice, where path was none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor sign, nor vestiges of man were near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At last a dark and barren vale I won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where caverned mountains and rude cliffs appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where in the middle rose a rugged block,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a fair castle planted on the rock.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>“From far it shone like flame, and seemed not dight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of marble or of brick; and in my eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More wonderful the work, more fair to sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The walls appeared, as I approached more nigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, after, learned that it was built by sprite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom potent fumes had raised and sorcery:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who on this rock its towers of steel did fix,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Case-hardened in the stream and fire of Styx.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Each polished turret shines with such a ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it defies the mouldering rust and rain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The robber scours the country night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And after harbours in this sure domain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nothing is safe which he would bear away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursued with curses and with threats in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There (fruitless every hope to foil his art)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The felon keeps my love, oh! say my heart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Alas! what more is left me but to eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her prison on that cliff’s aerial crest?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like the she-fox, who hears her offspring cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Standing beneath the ravening eagle’s nest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And since she has not wings to rise and fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Runs round the rugged rock with hopeless quest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So inaccessible the wild dominion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whatsoever has not plume and pinion.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>“While I so lingered where those rocks aspire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I saw a dwarf guide two of goodly strain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose coming added hope to my desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Alas! desire and hope alike were vain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both barons bold, and fearful in their ire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The one Gradasso, King of Sericane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The next, of youthful vigour, was a knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prized in the Moorish court, Rogero hight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“The dwarf exclaimed, ‘These champions will assay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their force with him who dwells on yonder steep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by such strange and unattempted way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spurs the winged courser from his mountain-keep.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I to the approaching warriors say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Pity, fair sirs, the cruel loss I weep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as I trust, yon daring spoiler slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give my lost lady to my arms again.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Then how my love was ravished I make known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vouching with bitter tears my deep distress.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They proffer aid, and down the path of stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which winds about the craggy mountain, press.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While I, upon the summit left alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Look on, and pray to God for their success.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the wily wizard’s castle strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Extends a little plain, two bow-shots long.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Arrived beneath the craggy keep, the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Contend which warrior shall begin the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, whether the first lot Gradasso drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or young Rogero held the honor light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The King of Sericane his bugle blew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the rock rang and fortress on the height;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, lo! apparelled for the fearful course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavalier upon his winged horse!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Upwards, by little and by little, springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The winged courser, as the pilgrim crane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Finds not at first his balance and his wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Running and scarcely rising from the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when the flock is launched and scattered, flings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His pinions to the wind, and soars amain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So straight the necromancer’s upward flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The eagle scarce attempts so bold a height.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>“When it seems fit, he wheels his courser round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who shuts his wings, and falling from the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shoots like a well trained falcon to the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who sees the quarry, duck or pigeon, fly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, through the parting air, with whizzing sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With rested lance, he darted from on high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And while Gradasso scarcely marks the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hears him swooping near, and feels the blow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>“The wizard on Gradasso breaks his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He wounds the empty air, with fury vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This in the feathered monster breeds no fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to a distance shifts, and swoops again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While that encounter made the Alfana rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thrown back upon her haunches, on the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Alfana that the Indian monarch rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fairest was that ever man bestrode.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Up to the starry sphere with swift ascent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wizard soars, then pounces from the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And strikes the young Rogero, who, intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon Gradasso, deems no danger nigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the wizard’s blow the warrior bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which made some deal his generous courser ply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when to smite the shifting foe he turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him in the sky, and out of reach discerned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“His blows Rogero, now Gradasso, bruise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On forehead, bosom, back, or flanks, between;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While he the warrior’s empty blows eschews,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shifting so quickly that he scarce is seen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now this, now that, the wizard seems to choose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monster makes such spacious rings and clean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the enchanter so deceives the knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They view him not, and know not whence he smites.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Between the two on earth and him o’ the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until that hour the warfare lasted there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, spreading wide its veil of dusky dye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout the world, discolours all things fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What I beheld, I say; I add not, I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A tittle to the tale; yet scarcely dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To tell to other what I stood and saw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So strange it seems, so passing Nature’s law.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Well covered in a goodly silken case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, the celestial warrior, bore his shield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But why delayed the mantle to displace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not, and its lucid orb concealed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since this no sooner blazes in his face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than his foe tumbles dazzled on the field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And while he, like a lifeless body, lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Becomes the necromancer’s helpless prize.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“LIke carbuncle, the magic buckler blazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No glare was ever seen which shone so bright:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor could the warriors choose but fall, amazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And blinded by the clear and dazzling light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, too, that from a distant mountain gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell senseless; and when I regained my sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After long time, saw neither knights nor page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor aught beside a dark and empty stage.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“This while the fell enchanter, I supposed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dragged both the warriors to his prison-cell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by strange virtue of the shield disclosed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I from my hope and they from freedom fell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus I to the turrets, which enclosed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My heart, departing, bade a last farewell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now sum my griefs, and say if love combine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Other distress or grief to match with mine.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The knight relapsed into his first disease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After his melancholy tale was done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This was Count Pinabel, the Maganzese,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anselmo d’Altaripa’s faithless son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, where the blood ran foul through all degrees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disdained to be the only virtuous one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor played a simple part among the base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Passing in vice the villains of his race.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>With aspect changing still, the beauteous dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hears what the mournful Maganzese narrates;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, at first mention of Rogero’s name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her radiant face with eager joy dilates.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, full of pity, kindles into flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Pinabel his cruel durance states.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor finds she, though twice told, the story stale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But makes him oft repeat and piece his tale.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>And, after, when she deemed that all was clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cried to the knight, “Repose upon my say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To thee may my arrival well be dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thou as fortunate account this day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Straight wend me to the keep, sir cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which holds a jewel of so rich a ray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor shalt thou grudge thy labour and thy care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If envious Fortune do but play me fair.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The knight replied, “Then nought to me remains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that I yonder mountain-passes show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sure ’tis little loss to lose my pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where every thing is lost I prize below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But you would climb yon cliffs, and for your gains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will find a prison-house, and be it so!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whate’er betide you, blame yourself alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You go forewarned to meet a fate foreshown.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>So said, the cavalier remounts his horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And serves the gallant damsel as a guide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who is prepared Rogero’s gaol to force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or to be slain, or in his prison stied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When lo! a messenger, in furious course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Called to the dame to stay, and rode and cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This was the post who told Circassa’s lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What valiant hand had stretched him on the sward.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The courier, who so plied his restless heel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">News of Narbonne and of Montpelier bore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How both had raised the standard of Castile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All Acquamorta siding with the Moor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how Marseilles’ disheartened men appeal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her, who should protect her straightened shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how, through him, her citizens demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Counsel and comfort at their captain’s hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>This goodly town, with many miles of plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which lie ’twixt Var and Rhone, upon the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her was given by royal Charlemagne:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such trust he placed in her fidelity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still wont with wonder on the tented plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prowess of that valiant maid to see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now the panting courier, as I said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rode from Marseilles to ask the lady’s aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Whether or not she should the call obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youthful damsel doubts some little space;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strong in one balance Fame and Duty weigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But softer thoughts both Fame and Duty chase:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she, at length, resolved the emprize to assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And free Rogero from the enchanted place:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or, should her valour in the adventure fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would with the cherished lover share his jail.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And did with such excuse that post appay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He was contented on her will to wait:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then turned the bridle to resume her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Pinabel, who seemed no whit elate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since of that line he knows the damsel gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Held in such open and such secret hate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And future trouble to himself foresees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were he detected as a Maganzese.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>For ’twixt Maganza’s and old Clermont’s line</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There was an ancient and a deadly feud:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oft to blows the rival houses came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oft in civil blood their hands embrued.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence some treason to this gentle dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his foul heart, the wicked County brewed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or, as the first occasion served, would stray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of the road, and leave her by the way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And so the traitor’s troubled fancy rack</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fear, doubt, and his own native, rancorous mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That unawares he issued from the track,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And found himself within a gloomy wood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where a rough mountain reared its shaggy back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose stony peak above the forest stood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The daughter of Dodona’s duke behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dogging his footsteps through the thicket blind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>He, when he saw himself within the brake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thought to abandon his unweeting foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the dame⁠—” ’Twere better that we make</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For shelter ere the gathering darkness grow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, yonder mountain past, (save I mistake)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A tower is seated in the vale below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do you expect me then, while from the peak</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I measure the remembered place I seek.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>So said, he pushed his courser up the height</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that lone mountain; in his evil mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Revolving, as he went, some scheme or sleight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rid him of the gentle dame behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When lo! a rocky cavern met his sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid those precipices dark and blind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its sides descended thirty yards and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worked smooth, and at the bottom was a door.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>A void was at the bottom, where a wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Portal conducted to an inner room:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From thence a light shone out on every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As of a torch illumining the gloom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair Bradamant pursued her faithless guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suspended there, and pondering on her doom:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And came upon the felon where he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fearing lest she might lose him in the wood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>When her approach the County’s first intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made vain, the wily traitor sought to mend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His toils, and some new stratagem invent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rid her thence, or bring her to her end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so to meet the approaching lady went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And showed the cave, and prayed her to ascend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said that in its bottom he had seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A gentle damsel of bewitching mien.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Who, by her lovely semblance and rich vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared a lady of no mean degree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But melancholy, weeping, and distressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As one who pined there in captivity:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that when he towards the entrance pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To learn who that unhappy maid might be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One on the melancholy damsel flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her within that inner cavern drew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The beauteous Bradamant, who was more bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than wary, gave a ready ear; and, bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To help the maid, imprisoned in that hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sought but the means to try the deep descent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, looking round, descried an elm-tree old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which furnished present means for her intent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the tree, with boughs and foliage stored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lopt a long branch, and shaped it with her sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>The severed end she to the count commended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, grasping it, hung down that entrance steep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her feet foremost, by her arms suspended:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When asking if she had the skill to leap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The traitor, with a laugh, his hands extended.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And plunged his helpless prey into the deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“And thus,” exclaimed the ruffian, “might I speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With thee each sucker of thy cursed seed!”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>But not, as was the will of Pinabel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such cruel lot fair Bradamant assayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For striking on the bottom of the cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stout elm-bough so long her weight upstayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, though it split and splintered where it fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It broked her fall, and saved the gentle maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some while astounded there the lady lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the ensuing canto will display.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
