<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-12" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>CANTO 12</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Orlando, full of rage, pursues a knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who bears by force his lady-love away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comes where old Atlantes, by his sleight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had raised a dome, Rogero there to stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here too Rogero comes; where getting sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his lost love, the County strives in fray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fierce Ferrau, and, after slaughter fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid the paynim host, finds Isabel.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Ceres, when from the Idaean dame in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returning to the lonely valley, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enceladus the Aetnaean mountain placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On his bolt-smitten flanks, is doomed to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her girl she found not, on that pathless waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By her late quitted, having rent her hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And marked cheeks, eyes, and breast, with livid signs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the end of her lament tore up two pines,</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>And lit at Vulcan's fire the double brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gave them virtue never to be spent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, afterwards, with one in either hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drawn by two dragons, in her chariot went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Searching the forest, hill, and level land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Field, valley, running stream, or water pent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The land and sea; and having searched the shell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of earth above, descended into hell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Had Roland of Eleusis' deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sovereign power possessed no less than will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He for Angelica had land and sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ransacked, and wood and field, and pool and rill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaven, and Oblivion's bottom: but since he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had not, his pressing purpose to fulfil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her dragon and her car, the unwearied knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursued the missing maid as best he might.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>Through France he sought her, and will seek her through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The realms of Italy and of Almayn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thence through the Castiles, both old and new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So passing into Libya out of Spain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While bold Orlando has this plan in view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hears, or thinks he hears, a voice complain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He forward spurs, and sees on mighty steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A warrior trot before him on the mead;</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>Who in his arms a captive damsel bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore grieving, and across the pommel laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She weeps and struggles, and the semblance wears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of cruel woe, and ever calls for aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon Anglantes' prince; and now appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him, as he surveys the youthful maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, for whom, night and day, with ceaseless pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inside and out, he France had searched in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>I say not is, but that she to the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seems the Angelica he loves so dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He who is lady-love and goddess' flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beholds, borne off in such afflicted cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impelled by fury foul, and angry spite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calls back with horrid voice the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calls back the cavalier, and threats in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Brigliadoro drives with flowing rein.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>That felon stops not, nor to him replies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On his great gain intent, his glorious prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with such swiftness through the greenwood hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wind would not overtake him on his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The one pursues while him the other flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with lament resounds the thicket gray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They issue in a spacious mead, on which</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appears a lofty mansion, rare and rich.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Of various marbles, wrought with subtle care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is the proud palace. He who fast in hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bears off upon his arm the damsel fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore pricking, enters at a gate of gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Brigliador is far behind the pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Backed by Orlando, angry knight and bold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Entering, around Orlando turns his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet neither cavalier nor damsel spies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>He suddenly dismounts, and thundering fares</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the inmost palace, seeking still his foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here and there in restless rage repairs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he has seen each bower, each galleried row;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the same purpose he ascends the stairs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having first vainly searched each room below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor spends less labour, on his task intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above, than he beneath had vainly spent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>Here beds are seen adorned with silk and gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor of partition aught is spied or wall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For these, and floor beneath, throughout that hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are hid by curtains and by carpets all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now here, now there, returns Orlando bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet can glad his eyes, in bower or hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the appearance of the royal maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or the foul thief by whom she was conveyed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>This while, as here and there in fruitless pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He moves, oppressed with thought and trouble sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso, Brandimart, and him of Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ferrau, he finds, with Sacripant and more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who ever toiling, like himself, in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above, that building, and beneath explore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as they wander, curse with one accord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The malice of the castle's viewless lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>All in pursuit of the offender speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And upon him some charge of robbery lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One knight complains that he has stolen his steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One that he has purloined his lady gay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Other accuses him of other deed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus within the enchanted cage they stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can depart; while in the palace pent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many have weeks and months together spent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Roland, when he round that strange dome had paced</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Four times or six, still vainly seeking, said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within himself, at last, "I here might waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My time and trouble, still in vain delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While haply her the robber whom I chased</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has far away, through other gate conveyed."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So thinking, from the house he issued out</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the mead which girt the dome about.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>While Roland wanders round the sylvan Hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still holding close his visage to the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see if recent print or trace withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can, right or left, upon the turf be found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from a neighbouring window hears a call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And looks, and thinks he hears that voice's sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thinks he sees the visage by which he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was so estranged from what he wont to be.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>He thinks he hears Angelica, and she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Help, help!" entreating cries, and weeping sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"More than for life and soul, alas! of thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Protection for my honour I implore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then shall it in my Roland's presence be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ravished by this foul robber? Oh! before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me to such miserable fate you leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let me from your own hand my death receive!"</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>These words repeated once, and yet again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made Roland through each chamber, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return with passion, and with utmost pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But tempered with high hope. Sometimes the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stopt in his search and heard a voice complain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which seemed to be Angelica's: if here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The restless warrior stand, it sounds from there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And calls for help he knows not whence nor where,</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Returning to Rogero, left, I said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When through a gloomy path, upon his steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Following the giant and the dame who fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from the wood had issued on the mead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say that he arrived where Roland dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived before him, if I rightly read.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The giant through the golden portal passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero close behind, who followed fast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As soon as he his foot has lifted o'er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The threshold, he through court and gallery spies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor sees the giant or the lady more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vainly glances here and there his eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He up and down returns with labour sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet not for that his longing satisfies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can imagine where the felon thief</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has hid himself and dame in space so brief.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>After four times or five he so had wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above, below, through bower and gallery fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He yet returned, and, having nothing found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Searched even to the space beneath the stair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length, in hope they in the woodlands round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might be, he sallied; but the voice, which there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roland recalled, did him no less recall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made as well return within the Hall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>One voice, one shape, which to Anglantes' peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seemed his Angelica, beseeching aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seemed to Rogero Dordogne's lady dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who him a truant to himself had made:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If with Gradasso, or with other near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He spake, of those who through the palace strayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To all of them the vision, seen apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seemed that which each had singly most at heart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>This was a new and unwonted spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the renowned Atlantes had composed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in this toil, this pleasing pain, might dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So long Rogero, by these walls enclosed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From him should pass away the influence fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Influence which him to early death exposed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though vain his magic tower of steel, and vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alcina's art, Atlantes plots again.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Not only he, but others who stood high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For valour, and in France had greatest fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That by their hands Rogero might not die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brought here by old Atlantes' magic came:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While these in the enchanted mansion lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That food be wanting not to knight or dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He has supplied the dome throughout so well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That all the inmates there in plenty dwell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But to Angelica return we, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now of that ring so wondrous repossessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Which, in her mouth, concealed the maid from view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Preserved from spell when it the finger pressed,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was in the mountain-cavern guided to</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whatever needed, viands, mare, and vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had conceived the project to pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her way to her fair Indian realm anew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>King Sacripant, or Roland, willingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel would have taken for her guide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that, propitious to their wishes, she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Averse from both) inclined to either side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, since her eastern journey was to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through town and city, scattered far and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She needed company, and ill had found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More trusty guides than these for such a round.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Now this, now that she sought with fruitless care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before she lit on either warrior's trace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By city or by farm, now here, now there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In forest now, and now in other place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fortune, at length, where caged with Roland are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ferrau and Sacripant, directs her chase;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, with Gradasso fierce, and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Noosed with strange witcheries by Atlantes hoar.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>She enters, hidden from the enchanter's eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the ring concealed, examines all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Roland there, and Sacripant espies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Intent to seek her vainly through the Hall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with her image cheating both, descries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Atlantes old. The damsel doubts withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which of the two to take, and long revolves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This in her doubtful thought, nor well resolves.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>She knows not which with her will best accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Count Orlando or Circassia's knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As of most powers, her would Rogero ward</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In passage perilous, with better might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But should she make the peer her guide, her lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She knew not if her champion she could slight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If him she would depress with altered cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or into France send back the cavalier:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But Sacripant at pleasure could depose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though him she had uplifted to the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence him alone she for her escort chose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And feigned to trust in his fidelity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ring she from her mouth withdraws, and shows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her face, unveiled to the Circassian's eye:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She thought to him alone; but fierce Ferrau</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Roland came upon the maid, and saw.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Ferrau and Roland came upon the maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For one and the other champion equally</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within the palace and without it strayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In quest of her, who was their deity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now, no longer by the enchantment stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each ran alike towards the dame, for she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had placed the ring upon her hand anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which old Atlantes' every scheme o'erthrew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Helm on the head and corselet on the breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of both the knights, of whom I sing, was tied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By night or day, since they into this rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had entered, never doffed and laid aside:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such to wear were easy as a vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To these, so wont the burden to abide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well was armed, except with iron masque,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ferrau, who wore not, nor would wear, a casque.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Till he had that erst wrested by the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando, from the brother of Troyane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For so had sworn the Spanish cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time he Argalia's helm in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sought in the brook; yet though the count was near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has not stretched forth his hand the prize to gain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For so it was, that neither of the pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could recognise the other knight while there.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Upon the enchanted dome lay such a spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they from one another were concealed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They doffed not, night nor day, the corselet's shell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not sword, nor even put aside the shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saddled, with bridle hanging at the sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their steeds were feeding, ready for the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within a chamber, near the palace door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With straw and barley heaped in plenteous store.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor might nor mean in old Atlantes lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To stop the knights from mounting, who repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To their good steeds, to chase the bright black eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fair vermillion cheeks and golden hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the sweet damsel, who before them flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And goads to better speed her panting mare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill pleased the three assembled to discern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though haply she had taken each in turn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And when these from the magic palace she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had ticed so far, that she no more supposed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warriors to the wicked fallacy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the malign enchanter were exposed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ring, which more than once from misery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had rescued her, she 'twixt her lips enclosed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence from their sight she vanished in a thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And left them wondering there, like men distraught.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Although she first the scheme had entertained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roland or Sacripant to have released,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To guide her thither, where her father reigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Galaphron, who ruled i' the farthest East,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The aid of both she suddenly disdained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in an instant from her project ceased;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deemed, without more debt to count or king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In place of either knight sufficed the ring.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>In haste, they through the forest, here and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So scorned of her, still gaze with stupid face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like questing hound which loses sight of hare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or fox, of whom he late pursued the trace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into close thicket, ditch, or narrow lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Escaping from the keen pursuer's chase.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meantime their ways the wanton Indian queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Observes, and at their wonder laughs unseen.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>In the mid wood, where they the maid did lose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was but a single pathway, left or right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which they believed the damsel could not choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But follow, when she vanished from their sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ferrau halts not, and Roland fast pursues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Sacripant less plies the rowels bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica, this while, retrains her steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And follows the three warriors with less speed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When pricking thus they came to where the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was in the forest lost, with wood o'ergrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had begun the herbage to survey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For print of recent footsteps, up and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fierce Ferrau, who might have borne away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From all that ever proudest were, the crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With evil countenance, to the other two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turned him about, and shouted "Whence are you?"</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Turn back or take another road, save here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In truth, you covet to be slain by me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor when I chase or woo my lady dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let any think I bear with company."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And — "What more could he say, sir cavalier,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Orlando cried to Sacripant) "if we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were known for the two basest whores that pull</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And reel from spindle-staff the matted wool?"</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>Then turning to Ferrau,, "But that thine head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou brutish sot, as I behold, is bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thy late words were ill or wisely said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou should'st perceive, before we further fare."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him Ferrau: "For that which breeds no dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In me, why should'st thou take such sovereign care?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What I have said unhelmed will I prove true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here, single as I am, on both of you."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Oh!" (to Circassia's king cried Roland dread)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Thy morion for this man let me entreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till I have driven such folly from his head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For never with like madness did I meet."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— "Who then would be most fool?" the monarch said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"But if indeed you deem the suit discreet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lend him thine own; nor shall I be less fit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply than thee to school his lack of wit."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>— "Fools, both of you!" (the fierce Ferrau replied)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"As if, did I to wear a helm delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You would not be without your casques of pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already reft by me in your despite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But know thus much, that I by vow am tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wear no helm, and thus my promise quite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roaming without, till that fine casque I win</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worn by Orlando, Charles's paladin."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>— "Then" (smiling, to the Spaniard said the count)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"With naked head, thou thinkest to repeat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On Roland what he did in Aspramont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Agolant's bold son: but shouldst thou meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior whom thou seekest, front to front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I warrant thou wouldst quake from head to feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor only wouldst forego the casque, but give</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knight thine other arms to let thee live."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>— "So oft have I had Roland on the hip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oft," (exclaimed the boaster) "heretofore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From him it had been easy task to strip</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What other arms, beside his helm, he wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if I still have let the occasion slip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— We sometimes think of things unwished before:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such wish I had not; I have now; and hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To compass easily my present scope."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>The good Orlando could no more forbear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cried, "Foul miscreant, liar, marched with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say, caitiff, in what country, when and where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Boast you to have obtained such victory?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That paladin am I, o'er whom you dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To vaunt, and whom you distant deemed: now see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If you can take my helm, or I have might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take your other arms in your despite.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Nor I o'er you the smallest vantage wou'd."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He ended, and his temples disarrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to a beech hung up the helmet good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And nigh as quickly bared his trenchant blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ferrau stands close, and in such attitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(His courage not for what had chanced dismayed)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Covered with lifted shield and naked sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As might best shelter to his head afford.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>'Twas thus those warriors two, with faulchions bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turning their ready steeds, began to wheel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where the armour thinnest was, and where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The meeting plates were joined, probed steel with steel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor was there in the world another pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More fitted to be matched in fierce appeal:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equal their daring, equal was their might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And safe alike from wound was either knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>By you, fair sir, already, I presume,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That fierce Ferrau was charmed is understood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save where the child, enclosed within the womb</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the full mother, takes its early food;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence he ever, till the squalid tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Covered his manly face, wore harness good</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Such was his wont) the doubtful part to guard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of seven good plates of metal, tempered hard.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Alike a charmed life Orlando bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Safe every where, except a single part:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unfenced beneath his feet, which evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him were guarded with all care and art.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest than diamond dug from mountain hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More hard, unless report from truth depart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And armed to battle either champion went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less for necessity than ornament.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>Waxing more fierce and fell the combat rages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fear and horror full, between the twain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fierce Ferrau such dreadful battle wages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That stroke or thrust is never dealt in vain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each mighty blow from Roland disengages</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And loosens, breaks, or shatters, plate and chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica alone, secure from view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Regards such fearful sight, and marks the two.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>For, during this, the king of Circassy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who deemed Angelica not far before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Ferrau and Orlando desperately</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Closing in fight were seen, his horse did gore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Along the way by which he deemed that she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had disappeared; and so that battle sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was witnessed 'twixt the struggling foes, by none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside the daughter of king Galaphron.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>After the damsel had sometime descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This dread and direful combat, standing nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And it appearing that on either side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With equal peril both the warriors vie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, fond of novelty, the helm untied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Designs to take; desirous to espy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What they would do when they perceived the wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, without thought to keep her plunder long.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>To give it to Orlando was she bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first she would upon the warrior play:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The helmet she took down with this intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in her bosom hid, and marked the fray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next thence, without a word to either went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the scene of strife was far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere either of the two had marked the feat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So were they blinded by their angry heat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>But Ferrau, who first chanced the loss to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Roland disengaged himself, and cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"How like unwary men and fools are we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Treated by him, who late with us did ride!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What meed, which worthiest of the strife might be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If this be stolen, the victor shall abide?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roland draws back, looks upward, and with ire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Missing the noble casque, is all on fire:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>And in opinion with Ferrau agreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he the knight, who was with them before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had born away the prize: hence turned his steed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the spur admonished Brigliador.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ferrau, who from the field beheld him speed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Followed him, and when Roland and the Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived where tracks upon the herbage green</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the Circassian and the maid were seen,</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Towards a vale upon the left the count</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Went off, pursuing the Circassian's tread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Spaniard kept the path more nigh the mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which the fair Angelica had fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica, this while, has reached a fount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of pleasant site, and shaded overhead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whose inviting shades no traveller hasted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever left the chrystal wave untasted.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Angelica, the sylvan spring beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reposes, unsuspicious of surprise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thinking her the sacred ring will hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fears not that evil accident can rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On her arrival at the fountain's side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She to a branch above the helmet ties;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then seeks the fittest sapling for her need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, fastened to its trunk, her mare may feed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The Spanish cavalier the stream beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived, who had pursued her traces there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica no sooner him espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than she evanished clean, and spurred her mare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The helm this while had dropt, but lay too wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be recovered of the flying fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as sweet Angelica he saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards her full of rapture sprang Ferrau.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>She disappeared, I say, as forms avaunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At sleep's departure: toiling long and sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He seeks the damsel there, 'twixt plant and plant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now can his wretched eyes behold her more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blaspheming his Mahound and Termagant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cursing every master of his lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ferrau returned towards the sylvan fount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where lay on earth the helmet of the count.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>This he soon recognised, for here he read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Letters upon the margin, written fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which how Orlando won the helmet said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from what champion took, and when and where.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With it the paynim armed his neck and head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would not for his grief the prize forbear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His grief for loss of her, conveyed from sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As disappear the phantoms of the night.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>When in this goodly casque he was arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He deemed nought wanting to his full content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the discovery of the royal maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who like a flash of lightning came and went:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For her he searches every greenwood shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when all hope of finding her is spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He for the vain pursuit no longer tarries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to the Spanish camp returns near Paris;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Tempering the grief which glowed within his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such sore disappointment, with the thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he was with Orlando's morion blest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As sworn. By good Anglante's count, when taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the false Saracen the prize possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long time the Spanish knight was vainly sought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Roland took the helmet from his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he between two bridges laid him dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Angelica thus, viewless and alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Speeds on her journey, but with troubled front;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grieved for the helmet, in her haste foregone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On her departure from the grassy fount.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Choosing to do what I should least have done,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(She said) "I took his helmet from the count.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This for his first desert I well bestow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A worthy recompense for all I owe!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"With good intentions, as God knows, I wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though these an ill and different end produce;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I took the helmet only with the thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bring that deadly battle to a truce;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not that this foul Spaniard what he sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should gain, or I to his intent conduce."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So she, lamenting, took herself to task</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For having robbed Orlando of his casque.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>By what appeared to her the meetest way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moody and ill-content she eastward pressed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ofttimes concealed, sometimes in face of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As seemed most opportune and pleased her best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After much country seen, a forest gray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She reached, where, sorely wounded in mid breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between two dead companions on the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The royal maid a bleeding stripling found.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>But of Angelica I now no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall speak, who first have many things to say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor shall to the Circassian or the Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give for long space a rhyme; thence called away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By good Anglante's prince, who wills, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I of those others tell, I should display</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The labours and the troubles he sustained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursuing the great good he never gained.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>At the first city, whither he was brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Because to go concealed he had good care),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He a new helmet donned; but took no thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What was the head-piece he designed to bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So safe is he in fairy spell, it nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Imports, if hard or soft its temper were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando, covered thus, pursues the quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor him day, night, or rain, or sun arrest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>It was the hour that our of Ocean's bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dan Phoebus drew his dripping steeds, and high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And low, still scattering yellow flowers and red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aurora stained the heavens with various dye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Stars had cast their veils about their head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Departing from their revels in the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When passing on a day fair Paris near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando made his mighty worth appear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Two squadrons he encountered; one an old</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saracen, Manilardo clept, obeyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King of Noritia, whilom fierce and bold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But fitter now to counsel than to aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The next beneath the standard was enrolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Tremisena's monarch, who was said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Mid Africans to be a perfect knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alzirdo he by those who knew him, hight:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>These, with the other Saracen array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cantoned throughout the winter months had lain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some near the city, some more far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All lodged nigh town or hamlet on the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For since King Agramant had many a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spent in attacking Paris' walls in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He (for no other means remained to try)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would lastly with a siege the city ply;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>And to do this had people infinite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since he, beside the host that with him came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that of Spain which followed to the fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Spanish King Marsilius' oriflame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many of France did in his pay unite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all from Paris he to Arles's stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With part of Gascony, some straggling tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Excepted, had reduced beneath his power.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>The quivering brook, as warmer breezes blew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beginning now from ice its waves to free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the fresh-springing grass and foliage new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To cloathe again the field and greenwood tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All those King Agramant assembled, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had followed him in his prosperity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To muster in review the armed swarm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And give to his affairs a better form:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Hence did the King of Tremisen' repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him who had Noritia in command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be in time at that full muster, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each squadron, good or bad, was to be scanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando thus by chance encountered there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As I have told you, this united hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, as his usage was, went seeking her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom he had been made Love's prisoner.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Alzirdo, as the approaching count he eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in this world for valour has no peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such a haughty front, and in such guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The God of war would less in arms appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The features known before astounded spies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fierce, disdainful glance and furious cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him esteems a knight of prowess high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, fondly, he too sore desires to try.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Arrogant, young, and of redoubted force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alzirdo was, and prized for dauntless mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who bent to joust pricked forth his foaming horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Happier had he remained in line behind!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Met by Anglante's prince in middle course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who pierced his heart as they encountering joined.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Frighted, the lightened courser scoured the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without a rider to direct the rein.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rises a sudden and a horrid cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And air on every side repeats the scream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As his scared band the falling youth descry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And issuing from his wound so wide a stream:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disordered, they the count in fury ply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, raised to cut or thrust, their weapons gleam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against that flower of knights, their feathered reeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thicker squadron yet in tempest speeds.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>With sound like that, with which from hill repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or from the champaign's flat the hurrying swine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(If the Wolf, issue from his grot, or Bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Descending to the mountains' lower line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some bristly youngling take away and tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with loud squeal and grunt is heard to pine)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came driving at the count the barbarous rout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Upon him!" and "upon him!" still their shout.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>At once spears, shafts, and swords, his corslet bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By thousands, and as many pierce his shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This threatens on one side, and that before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those the ponderous mace behind him wield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he esteems the craven rout no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, who did never yet to terror yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than hungry Wolf in twilight makes account</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To what the number of the flock may mount.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>He held unsheathed that thundering sword in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which with so many foes has heaped the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he who thinks to count the slaughtered band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has undertaken, hard emprize and vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The road ran red, ensanguined by his brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scarce capacious of the many slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For neither targe nor head-piece good defends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where fatal Durindana's blade descends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor safety cotton vest, nor cloths supply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In thousand folds about the temples spread:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor only groan and lamentation fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through air, but shoulder, arm, and severed head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Death roams the field in strange variety</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of horrid forms, and all inspiring dread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And says, "For hundreds of my scythes may stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His Durindana in Orlando's hand."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>His ceaseless strokes scarce one the other wait:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Speedily all his foemen are in flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when before they came at furious rate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They hoped to swallow quick the single knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None is there who, in that unhappy straight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stops for his comrade, flying from the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here one man speeds afoot, one gallops there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None stays to question if the road be fair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>His mirror Valour bore about, and here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each blemish of the soul was seen confest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None looked therein, except an aged peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose blood was chilled, but courage unreprest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That death were better deems this cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than life in flight, and in disgrace possest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I mean Noritia's king, who lays his lance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In rest against the paladin of France;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He broke it on the border of the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the intrepid count, with stedfast hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, by the stroke unshaken, nothing reeled:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And smote the king, in passing, with his brand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him Fortune saved; for as Orlando wheeled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The blade, it turned, descending, in his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although an-edge he guides not still the sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stunned from his saddle reels the paynim lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Astounded from his saddle reels the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor him Orlando turns about to see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He cuts, and cleaves, and slays his following;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who all believe him at their backs to be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As through the spacious air, with troubled wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The starlings from the daring merlin flee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, of that broken squadron, scattered round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some fly, some dip, and some fall flat to ground.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>He ceased not his ensanguined blade to sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till living wight remained not in his view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando doubted to resume his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although the country all about he knew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Does he the right or left-hand road assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His thoughts still rove from what his steps pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he to seek the damsel is in dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through other path than that by which she fled.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Through wood and field his courser did he goad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Often inquiring for the royal dame:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside himself, he strayed beside his road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the foot of rising mountain came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence (it was night-time) through a fissure glowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The distant flicker of a quivering flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando to the rock approached, to spy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If there Angelica concealed might lie.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>As where low junipers o'er shade her lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or in the stubble of the open lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time the hunters seek the fearful hare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through traversed woods, and through uncertain way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Lest peradventure she be hidden there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They every bramble, every bush assay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even so, where hope the toiling warrior leads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Searching his lady-love, Orlando speeds.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Pricking in haste towards that ray, the count</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived where in the wood the light was shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forth-streaming from a crevice in the mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within whose womb a spacious grotto spread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there, like wall or bank, discerned in front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of thorns and underwood a bristly bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hide the grotto's inmates, and defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From scathe or scorn, which others might intend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>By day it had been hidden evermore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the clear flame betrayed the haunt by night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its use he guessed; but would the place explore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And better certify himself by sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he without had tied his Brigliador,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In silence to the grotto stole the knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threading the shrubs; nor calling for a guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Entered the passage in the mountain's side.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>By a long flight of steps was the descent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the cave; where, in the rocky tomb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Buried were living folk. Of wide extent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The grot was chiselled into vaulted room;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor was, although its entrance little lent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All daylight wanting to disperse the gloom:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For much was furnished by a window dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within a natural fissure on the right.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>In the mid cave, beside a fire was seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A gentle maid of pleasing look and guise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who seemed to Roland little past fifteen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As far as at first sight he might surmise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that so fair she made the rugged scene</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seem in the warrior's sight a paradise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although this while her eyes with tears o'erflow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clear tokens of a heart oppressed with woe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>An aged dame was with her, and the pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wrangled, as oftentimes is women's way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when the County was descending there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Concluded the dispute and wordy fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando hastens to salute them fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As still is due to womankind) and they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To welcome him rise lightly form their seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with benign return the warrior greet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>'Tis true, that when that sudden voice they hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Somedeal confused in look they seem to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the same time beholding thus appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So fierce a wight, and harnessed cap-a-pee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"What wight" (demands Anglantes' cavalier)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So barbarous is, and void of courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he keeps buried, in this rude repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A face so gentle and so passing fair?"</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>With pain the virgin to the count replies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he inquires of her unhappy doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In sweet and broken accents, which by sighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impelled, through rows of pearl and coral come:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And between rose and lily, from her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tears fall so fast, she needs must swallow some.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In other canto, sir, be pleased to attend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest, for here 'tis time my strain should end.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
