<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XLV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-45" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Young Leo doth from death Rogero free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him Rogero Bradamant hath won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making that maid appear less strong to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disguised in fight like Leo; and, that done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straight in despite would slay himself; so he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By sorrow, so by anguish is foredone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hinder Leo of his destined wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marphisa works, and kindles mighty strife.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>By how much higher we see poor mortal go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On Fortune’s wheel, which runs a restless round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We so much sooner see his head below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His heels; and he is prostrate on the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Lydian, Syracusan, Samian<a/><!--Footnote--> show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This truth, and more whose names I shall not sound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All into deepest dolour in one day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hurled headlong from the height of sovereign sway.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>By how much more deprest on the other side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By how much more the wretch is downwards hurled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He so much sooner mounts, where he shall ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If the revolving wheel again be twirled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some on the murderous block have well-nigh died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That on the following day have ruled the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ventidius, Servius, Marius this have shown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In ancient days; King Lewis in our own;</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>King Lewis, stepfather of my duke’s son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, when his host at Santalbino fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left in <em>his</em> clutch by whom that field was won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was nigh remaining shorter by the head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor long before the great Corvinus<a/><!--Footnote--> run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A yet more fearful peril, worse bested:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both throned, when overblown was their mischance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One king of Hungary, one king of France.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>’Tis plain to sight, through instances that fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The page of ancient and of modern story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ill succeeds to good, and good to ill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That glory ends in shame, and shame in glory;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that man should not trust, deluded still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In riches, realm, or field of battle, gory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hostile blood, nor yet despair, for spurns</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Fortune; since her wheel for ever turns.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>Through that fair victory, when overthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were Leo and his royal sire, the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who won that battle to such trust is grown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his good fortune and his peerless might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, without following, without aid, alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So is he prompted by his daring sprite)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thinks, mid a thousand squadrons in array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Footmen and horsemen⁠—sire and son to slay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>But she, that wills no trust shall e’er be placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In her by man, to him doth shortly show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How wight by her is raised, and how abased;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How soon she is a friend, how soon a foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She makes him know Rogero, that in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is gone to work that warrior shame and woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavalier, which in that battle dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With much ado had from his faulchion fled.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>He to Ungiardo hastens to declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Child who put the imperial host to flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose carnage many years will not repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here past the day and was to pass the night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saith, that Fortune, taken by the hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without more trouble, and without more fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will, if he prisons <em>him</em>, the Bulgars bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the yoke and lordship of his king.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Ungiardo from the crowd, which had pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither their flight from the ensanguined plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For, troop by troop, a countless multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived, because not all the bridge could gain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knew what a cruel slaughter had ensued:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For there the moiety of the Greeks was slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knew that by a cavalier alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One host was saved, and one was overthrown;</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>And that undriven he should have made his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the net, and of his own accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wondered, and showed his pleasure, at the say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In visage, gesture, and in joyful word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He waited till Rogero sleeping lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then softly sent his guard to take that lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made the valiant Child, who had no dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of such a danger, prisoner in his bed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>By his own shield accused, that witness true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Child is captive in Novogorood,<a/></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Ungiardo, worst among the cruel, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marvellous mirth to have that prisoner shewed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what, since he was naked, could he do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bound, while his eyes were yet by slumber glued?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A courier, who the news should quickly bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ungiardo bids to Constantine repair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>Constantine on that night with all his host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raising his camp, from Save’s green shore had gone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this in Beleticche he takes post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Androphilus’, his sister’s husband’s town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Father of him, whose arms in their first joust</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As if of wax had been his habergeon)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had pierced and carved the puissant cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now by Ungiardo pent in dungeon drear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>Here from attack the emperor makes assure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The city walls and gates on every side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest, from the Bulgar squadrons ill secure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having so good a warrior for their guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His broken Grecians worse than fear endure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming the rest would by his hand have died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now he is taken, these breed no alarms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would he fear the banded world in arms.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The emperor, swimming in a summer sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knows not for very pleasure what to do:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Truly the Bulgars may be said to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vanquished,” he cries, with bold and cheerful brow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As <em>he</em> would feel assured of victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That had of either arm deprived his foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So the emperor was assured, and so rejoiced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When good Rogero’s fate the warrior voiced.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>No less occasion has the emperor’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For joying; for besides that he anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trusts to acquire Belgrade, and tower and town</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout the Bulgars’ country to subdue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would by favours make the knight his own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hopes to rank him in his warlike crew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor need he envy, guarded by his blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Charles’, Orlando’s, or Rinaldo’s aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>Theodora was by other thoughts possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose son was killed by young Rogero’s spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which through his shoulders, entering at his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Issued a palm’s breadth in the stripling’s rear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Constantine’s sister she, by grief opprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell down before him; and with many a tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That dropt into her bosom, while she sued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His heart with pity softened and subdued.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“I still before these feet will bow my knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save on this felon, good my lord,” (she cried)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Who killed my son, to venge me thou agree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now that we have him in our hold; beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he thy nephew was, thou seest how thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He loved; thou seest what feats upon thy side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That warrior wrought; thou seest if thou wilt blot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thine own good name, if thou avenge him not.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Thou seest how righteous Heaven by pity stirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the wide champaign, red with Grecian gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bears that fell man; and like a reckless bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the fowler’s net hath made him soar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That for short season, for revenge deferred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My son may mourn upon the Stygian shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give me, <em>my</em> lord, I pray, this cruel foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That by his torment I may soothe my woe.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>So well she mourns; and in such moving wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And efficacious doth she make lament;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Nor from before the emperor will arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though he three times and four the dame has hent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to uplift by word and action tries)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he is forced her wishes to content;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus, according to her prayer, commands</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Child to be delivered to her hands;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And, not therein his orders to delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They take the warrior of the unicorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To cruel Theodora; but one day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of respite has the knight: to have him torn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In quarters, yet alive; to rend and slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her prisoners publicly with shame and scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seems a poor pain; and he must undergo</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Other unwonted and unmeasured woe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>At the commandment of that woman dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chains on his neck and hands and feet they don;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And put him in a dungeon-cell, where thread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of light was never by Apollo thrown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He has a scanty mess of mouldy bread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sometimes is he left two days with none;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one that doth the place of jailer fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is prompter than herself to work him ill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Oh! if Duke Aymon’s daughter brave and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of if Marphisa of exalted mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had heard Rogero’s sad estate declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how he in this guise in prison pined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his rescue either would have made repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would have flung the fear of death behind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor had bold Bradamant, intent to aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Respect to Beatrice or Aymon paid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile King Charlemagne upon his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heeding his promise made in solemn sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That none should have the damsel for his bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That of her prowess in the field fell short;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not only had his sovereign pleasure cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sound of trumpet in his royal court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But in each city subject to his crown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence quickly through the world the bruit was blown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Such the condition which he bids proclaim:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“He that would with Duke Aymon’s daughter wed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must with the sword contend against that dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the suns rise until he seeks his bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if he for that time maintains the game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And is not overcome, without more said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady is adjudged to have lost the stake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor him for husband can refuse to take.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“The choice of arms must be by her foregone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No matter who may claim it in the course:”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the damsel this may well be done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Good at all arms alike, on foot or horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aymon, who cannot strive against the crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Cannot and will not⁠—yields at length parforce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He much the matter sifts, and in the end</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolves to court with Bradamant to wend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Though for the daughter choler and disdain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mother nursed, yet that she honour due</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might have, she garments, dyed in different grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had wrought for her, of various form and hue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant for the court of Charlemagne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Departs, and finding not her love, to her view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His noble court appears like <em>that</em> no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had appeared to her so fair before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>As he that hath beheld a garden, bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With flowers and leaves in April or in May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next beholds it, when the sun his light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath sloped toward the north, and shortened day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Finds it a desert horrid to the sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, now that her Rogero is away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Bradamant, who thither made resort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No longer what it was appeared that court.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>What is become of him she doth not dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Demand, lest more suspicion thence be bred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But listens still, and searches here and there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That this by some, unquestioned, may be said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knows he is gone, but has no notion where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior, when he went, his steps had sped:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because, departing thence, he spake no word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save to the squire who journeyed with his lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Oh! how she sighs! how fears the gentle maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hearing Rogero, as it were, was flown!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh! how above all other terrors, weighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fear, that to forget her he was gone!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, seeing Aymon still his wish gainsayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that to wed the damsel hope was none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fled, perchance, so hoping to be loosed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From toils wherein he by her love was noosed;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And that with further end the youthful lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her from his heart more speedily to chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will rove from realm to realm, till one afford</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some dame, that may his former love efface;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even, as the proverb says, that in a board</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One nail drives out another from its place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A second thought succeeds, and paints the youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arraigned of fickleness, as full of truth;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>And her reproves for having lent an ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a suspicion so unjust and blind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so, this thought absolves the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that accuses; and both audience find;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now this way, now that, she seemed to veer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this, nor that⁠—irresolute of mind⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Preferred: yet still to what gave most delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Most promptly leaned, and loathed its opposite;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>And thinking, ever and anon, anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On that so oft repeated by the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As for grave sin, remorse and sorrow grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she had nursed suspicion and affright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she, as her Rogero were in view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would blame herself, and would her bosom smite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And say; “I see ’twas ill such thoughts to nurse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he, the cause, is even cause of worse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Love is the cause; that in my heart inlaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy form, so graceful and so fair to see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so thy darling and thy wit pourtrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And worth, of all so bruited, that to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seems impossible that wife or maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blest with thy sight, should not be fired by thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that she should not all her art apply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To unbind, and fasten thee with other tie.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Ah! wellaway! if in my thought Love so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy thought, as thy fair visage, had designed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This⁠—am I well assured⁠—in open show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As I unseen believe it, should I find;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be so quit of Jealousy, that foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would not still harass my suspicious mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, where she is by me repulsed with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not quelled and routed would she be, but slain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“I am like miser, so intent on gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who hath this so buried in his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he, for hoarded treasure still in fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cannot live gladly from his wealth apart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since I Rogero neither see nor hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More puissant far than Hope, O Fear! thou art;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To thee, though false and idle I give way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cannot choose but yield myself thy prey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“But I, Rogero, shall no sooner spy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The light of thy glad countenance appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against mine every credence, from mine eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Concealed (and woe is me), I know not where⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh! how true Hope false Fear shall from on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Depose withal, and to the bottom bear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah! turn to me, Rogero! turn again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And comfort Hope, whom Fear hath almost slain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“As when the sun withdraws his glittering head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The shadows lengthen, causing vain affright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as the shadows, when he leaves his bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vanish, and reassure the timid wight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without Rogero so I suffer dread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dread lasts not, if Rogero is in sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return to me, return, Rogero, lest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My hope by fear should wholly be opprest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“As every spark is in the night alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And suddenly extinguished when ’tis morn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When me my sun doth of his rays deprive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against me felon Fear uplifts his horn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But they the shades of night no sooner drive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Fears are past and gone, and Hopes return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return, alas! return, O radiance dear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And drive from me that foul, consuming Fear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“If the sun turn from us and shorten day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Earth all its beauties from the sight doth hide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wild winds howl, and snows and ice convey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bird sings not; nor is leaf or flower espied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, whensoever thou thy gladsome ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O my fair sun, from me dost turn aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand, and all evil, dreads, make drear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Winter within me many times a year.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Return, my sun, return! and springtide sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which evermore I long to see, bring back;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dislodge the snows and ice with genial hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And clear my mind, so clouded o’er and black.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As Philomel, or Progne, with the meat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returning, which her famished younglings lack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mourns o’er an empty nest, or as the dove</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laments himself at having lost is love;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>The unhappy Bradamant laments her so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fearing the Child is reft from her and gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While often tears her visage overflow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But she, as best she can, conceals her moan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh! how⁠—oh! how much worse would be her woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If what she knew not to the maid were known!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, prisoned and with pain and pine consumed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her consort to a cruel death was doomed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>The cruelty which by that beldam ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was practised on the prisoned cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who prepared the wretched Child to kill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By torture new and pains unused whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While so Rogero pined, the gracious will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Heaven conveyed to gentle Leo’s ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And put into his heart the means to aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not to let such worth be overlaid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>The courteous Leo that Rogero loved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that the Grecian knew howe’er that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero was, but by that valour moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which sole and superhuman seemed to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thought much, and mused, and planned, how it behoved</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—And found at last a way⁠—to set him free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that his cruel aunt should have no right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To grieve or say he did her a despite.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>In secret, Leo with the man that bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prison-keys a parley had, and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“He wished to see that cavalier, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the wretch was done a doom so dread.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When it was night, one, faithful found of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bold, strong, and good in brawl, he thither led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And⁠—by the silent warder taught that none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must know ’twas Leo⁠—was the door undone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Leo, escorted by none else beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was led by the compliant castellain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his companion, to the tower, where stied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was he, reserved for nature’s latest pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There round the neck of their unwary guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who turns his back the wicket to unchain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A slip-knot Leo and his follower cast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, throttled by the noose, he breathes his last.<a/></span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>—The trap upraised, by rope from thence suspended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such a need⁠—the Grecian cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With lighted flambeau in his hand, descended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, straitly bound, and without sun to cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero lay, upon a grate extended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less than a palm’s breadth of the water clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To kill him in a month, or briefer space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nothing was needed but that deadly place.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Lovingly Leo clipt the Child, and, “Me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O cavalier! thy matchless valour,” cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Hath in indissoluble bands to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In willing and eternal service, tried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wills thy good to mine preferred should be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I for thine my safety set aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And weigh thy friendship more than sire, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom I throughout the world my kindred call.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“I Leo am, that thou what fits may’st know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come to thy succour, the Greek emperor’s son:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If ever Constantine, my father, trow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I have aided thee, I danger run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be exiled, or aye with troubled brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Regarded for the deed that I have done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thee he hates because of those thy blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Put to the rout and slaughtered near Belgrade.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He his discourse with more beside pursues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That might from death to life the Child recall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all this while Rogero’s hands doth loose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Infinite thanks I owe you,” cries the thrall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“And I the life you gave me, for your use</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will ever render back, upon your call;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still, at all your need, I for your sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at all times, that life will promptly stake.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero is rescued; and the gaoler slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is left in that dark dungeon in his place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor is Rogero known, nor are the twain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leo the warrior, free from bondage base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brings home, and there in safety to remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Persuades, in secret, four or six days’ space:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Meanwhile for him will he retrieve the gear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And courser, by Ungiardo reft whilere.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>Open the gaol is found at dawn of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gaoler strangled, and Rogero gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some think that <em>these</em> or <em>those</em> had helped his flight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All talk; and yet the truth is guessed by none.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well may they think by any other wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than Leo had the deed been done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For many deemed he had cause to have repaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Child with scathe, and none to give him aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>So wildered by such kindness, so immersed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In wonder, is the rescued cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So from those thoughts is he estranged, that erst</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many weary miles had made him steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His second thoughts confronting with his first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor these like those, nor those like these appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He first with hatred, rage, and venom burned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With pity and with love then wholly yearned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>Much muses he by night and much by day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Nor cares for ought, nor ought desires beside⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By equal or more courtesy to pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mighty debt that him to Leo tied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be his life long or short, or what it may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit to Leo’s service all applied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dies he a thousand deaths, he can do nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But more will be deserved, Rogero thought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Thither meanwhile had tidings been conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Charles’ decree; “that who in nuptial tie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would yoke with Bradamant, with trenchant blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or lance must with the maid his prowess try.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These news the Grecian prince so ill appaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His cheek was seen to blanch with sickly dye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because, as one that measured well his might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He knew he was no match for her in fight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Communing with himself, he can supply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(He sees) the valour wanting with his wit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the strange knight with his own ensignry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose name is yet unknown to him, will fit:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him he against Frank champion, far and nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believes he may for force and daring pit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if the knight to that emprize agree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vanquished and taken Bradamant will be.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>But two things must he do; must, first, dispose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That cavalier to undertake the emprize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then send afield the champion, whom he chose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In mode, that none suspect the youth’s disguise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him the matter Leo doth disclose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And after prays in efficacious wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he the combat with the maid will claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under false colours and in other’s name.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Much weighs the Grecian’s eloquence; but more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than eloquence with good Rogero weighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mighty obligation which he bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That debt which cannot ever be repaid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, albeit it appeared a hardship sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thing well-nigh impossible, he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With blither face than heart, “that Leo’s will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all that he commands he would fulfil.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Albeit no sooner he the intent exprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than with sore grief Rogero’s heart was shent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, night and day, and ever, doth molest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ever afflict him, evermore torment:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And though he sees his death is manifest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never will he confess he doth repent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than not with Leo’s prayer comply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand deaths, not one, the Child will die.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Right sure he is to die; if he forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady, he foregoes his life no less.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His heart will break through his distress and woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or, breaking not with woe and with distress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will, himself, the bands of life undo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of its clay the spirit dispossess.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all things can he better bear than one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than see that gentle damsel not his own.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>To die is he disposed; but how to die</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cannot as yet the sorrowing lord decide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sometimes he thinks his prowess to belie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And offer to her sword his naked side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For never death can come more happily</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than if her hand the fatal faulchion guide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then sees, except he wins the martial maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that Greek prince, the debt remains unpaid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>For he with Bradamant, as with a foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Promised to do, not feign, a fight in mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not to make of arms a seeming show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that his sword should Leo ill avail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then by his word will he abide; and though</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His breast now these now other thoughts assail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All from his bosom chased the generous youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save that which moved him to maintain his truth.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>With the emperor’s licence, armour to prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And steeds meanwhile had wrought his youthful son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with such goodly following as might square</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his degree, upon his way was gone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him Rogero rides, through Leo’s care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equipt with horse and arms, that were his own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Day after day the squadron pricks; nor tarries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until arrived in France; arrived at Paris.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Leo will enter not the town; but nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pitches his broad pavilions on the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his arrival by an embassy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes known that day to royal Charlemagne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well pleased is he; and visits testify</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many gifts the monarch’s courteous vein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His journey’s cause the Grecian prince displayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to dispatch his suit the sovereign prayed:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“To send afield the damsel, who denied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ever to take in wedlock any lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weaker than her: for she should be his bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or he would perish by the lady’s sword.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charles undertook for this; and, on her side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The following day upon the listed sward</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the walls, in haste, enclosed that night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared the martial maid, equipt for fight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero past the night before the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein by him the battle should be done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like that which felon spends, condemning to pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Life’s forfeit with the next succeeding sun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He made his choice to combat in the fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All armed; because he would discovery shun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor barded steed he backed, nor lance he shook;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor other weapon than his faulchion took.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>No lance he took: yet was it not through fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that which Argalia whilom swayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho’s next; then hers, that in career</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her foemen ever upon earth had laid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because none weened such force was in the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor that it was by necromancy made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Excepting royal Galaphron alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had it forged, and gave it to his son.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Nay, bold Astolpho, and the lady who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afterwards bore it, deemed that not to spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But simply to their proper force, was due</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The praise that they in knightly joust excel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with whatever spear they fought, those two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believed that they should have performed as well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What only makes that knight the joust forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is that he would not his Frontino show.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>For easily that steed of generous kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She might have known, if him she had espied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom in Montalban, long to her consigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gentle damsel had been wont to ride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, that but schemes, but hath in mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How he from Brandamant himself shall hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Neither Frontino nor yet other thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereby he may be known, afield will bring.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>With a new sword will he the maid await;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For well he knew against the enchanted blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soft as paste would prove all mail and plate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For never any steel its fury stayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And heavily with hammer, to rebate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its edge, as well he on this faulchion laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So armed, Rogero in the lists appeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the first dawn of day the horizon cheered.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>To look like Leo, o’er his breast is spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The surcoat that the prince is wont to wear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the gold eagle with its double head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He blazoned on the crimson shield doth bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (what the Child’s disguisement well may stead)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of equal size and stature are the pair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the other’s form presents himself the one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That other lets himself be seen of none.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Dordona’s martial maid is of a vein</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Right different from the gentle youth’s, who sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hammers and blunts the faulchion’s tempered grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest it his opposite should cleave or bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She whets her steel, and into it would fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enter, that stripling to the quick to gore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yea, would such fury to her strokes impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That each should go directly to his heart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>As on the start the generous barb in spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he the signal full of fire attends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And paws now here now there; and opens wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His nostrils, and his pointed ears extends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So the bold damsel, to the lists defied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who knows not with Rogero she contends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seemed to have fire within her veins, nor found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resting-place, waiting for the trumpet’s sound.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>As sometimes after thunder sudden wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turns the sea upside down; and far and nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dim clouds of dust the cheerful daylight blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raised in a thought from earth, and whirled heaven-high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scud beasts and herd together with the hind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And into hail and rain dissolves the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So she upon the signal bared her brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fell on her Rogero, sword in hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But well-built wall, strong tower, or aged oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more are moved by blasts that round them rave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more by furious sea is moved the rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote day and night by the tempestuous wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than in those arms, secure from hostile stroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which erst to Trojan Hector Vulcan gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moved was he by that ire and hatred rank</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which stormed about his head, and breast, and flank.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Now aims that martial maid a trenchant blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now gives point; and wholly is intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twixt plate and plate to reach her hated foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that her stifled fury she may vent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now on this side, now that, now high, now low</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She strikes, and circles him, on mischief bent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And evermore she rages and repines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As balked of every purpose she designs.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>As he that layeth siege to well-walled town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And flanked about with solid bulwarks, still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Renews the assault; now fain would batter down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gateway or tower; now gaping fosse would fill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet vainly toils (for entrance is there none)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wastes his host, aye frustrate of his will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So sorely toils and strives without avail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel, nor can open plate or mail.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Sparks now his shield, now helm, now cuirass scatter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While straight and back strokes, aimed now low, now high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which good Rogero’s head and bosom batter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And arms, by thousands and by thousands fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faster than on the sounding farm-roof patter</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hailstones descending from a troubled sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, at his ward, with dexterous care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Defends himself, and ne’er offends the fair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Now stopt, now circled, now retired the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oft his hand his foot accompanied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lifted shield, and shifted sword in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where shifting he the hostile hand espied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Either he smote her not, or⁠—die he smite⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote, where he deemed least evil would betide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady, ere the westering sun descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desires to bring that duel to an end.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Of the edict she remembered her, and knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her peril, save the foe was quickly sped:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if she took not in one day, nor slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her claimant, she was taken; and his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Phoebus was now about to hide from view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nigh Hercules’ pillars, in his watery bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When first she ’gan misdoubt her power to cope</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the strong foe, and to abandon hope.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>By how much more hope fails the damsel, so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much more her anger waxes; she her blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Redoubling, yet the harness of her foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will break, which through that day unbroken shows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he, that at his daily drudgery slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sees night on his unfinished labour close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hurries and toils and moils without avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till wearied strength and light together fail.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Didst thou, O miserable damsel, trow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom thou wouldst kill, if in that cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Matched against thee thou didst Rogero know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On whom depend thy very life-threads, ere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou killed him thou wouldst kill thyself; for thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know, dost hold him than thyself more dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when he for Rogero shall be known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know these very strokes thou wilt bemoan.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>King Charles and peers him sheathed in plate and shell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deem not Rogero, but the emperor’s son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And viewing in that combat fierce and fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such force and quickness by the stripling shown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, without e’er offending her, how well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That knight defends himself, now change their tone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteem both well assorted; and declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The champions worthy of each other are.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>When Phoebus wholly under water goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charlemagne bids the warring pair divide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Bradamant (nor boots it to oppose)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Allots to youthful Leo as a bride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not there Rogero tarried to repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor loosed his armour, nor his helm untied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On a small hackney, hurrying sore, he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Leo him awaited in his tent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Twice in fraternal guise and oftener threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leo his arms about the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next his helmet from his head withdrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And kiss’d him on both cheeks with loving cheer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I would,” he cried, “that thou wouldst ever do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By me what pleaseth thee; for thou wilt ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weary my love: at any call I lend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To thee myself and state; these friendly spend;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Nor see I recompense, which can repay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mighty obligation that I owe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though of the garland I should disarray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My brows, and upon thee that gift bestow.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, on whom his sorrows press and prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who loathes his life, immersed in that deep woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Little replies; the ensigns he had worn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returns, and takes again his unicorn;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>And showing himself spiritless and spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From thence as quickly as he could withdrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from young Leo’s to his lodgings went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When it was midnight, armed himself anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saddled his horse, and sallied from his tent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(He takes no leave, and none his going view;)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his Frontino to that road addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which seemed to please the goodly courser best.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Now by straight way and now by crooked wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Frontino, now by wood and wide champaign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all night with his rider paced that round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who never ceased a moment to complain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He called on Death, and therein comfort found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since broke by him alone is stubborn pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor saw, save Death, what other power could close</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The account of his insufferable woes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Whereof should I complain,” he said, “wo is me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So of my every good at once forlorn?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah! if I will not bear this injury</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without revenge, against whom shall I turn?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I, besides myself, none other see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hath inflicted on me scathe and scorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then I to take revenge for all the harm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Done to myself, against myself must arm.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Yet was but to myself this injury done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Myself to spare (because this touched but me)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I haply could, yet hardly could, be won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay, I will say outright, I could not be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less can I be, since not to me alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Bradamant, is done this injury;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even if I could consent myself to spare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It fits me not unvenged to leave that fair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Then I the damsel will avenge, and die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Nor this disturbs me) whatsoe’er betide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, bating death, I know not aught, whereby</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Defence against my grief can be supplied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I lament myself alone, that I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before offending her, should not have died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O happier Fortune! had I breathed my last</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Theodora’s dungeon prisoned fast!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>“Though she had slain, had tortured me before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She slew, as prompted by her cruelty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least the hope would have remained in store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I by Bradamant should pitied be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when she knows that I loved Leo more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than her, that, of my own accord and free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Myself of her, I for his good, deprive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dead will she rightly hate me or alive.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>These words he said and many more, with sigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And heavy sob withal accompanied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, when another sun illumed the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid strange and gloomy woods himself espied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for he desperate was and bent to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, as best he could, his death would hide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This place to him seemed far removed from view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fitted for the deed that he would do.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>He entered into that dark woodland, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thickest trees and most entangled, spied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first Frontino was the warrior’s care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom he unharnessed wholly, and untied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“O my Frontino, if thy merits rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I could reward, thou little cause” (he cried)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Shouldst have to envy him, so highly graced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who soared to heaven, and mid the stars was placed.<a/></span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Nor Cillarus, nor Arion,<a/> was whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthier than thee, nor merited more praise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor any other steed, whose name we hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sounded in Grecian or in Latin lays.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was any such in other points thy peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None of them, well I know, the vaunt can raise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That such high honour and such courtesy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were upon him bestowed, as were on thee.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Since to the gentlest maid, of fairest dye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And boldest that hath been, or evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will be, thou wast so dear, she used to tie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy trappings, and to thee thy forage bore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dear wast thou to my lady love: Ah! why</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Call I her mine, since she is mine no more?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I have given her to another lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why turn I not upon myself this sword?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>If him these thoughts so harass and torment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That bird and beast are softened by his cries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For, saving these, none hears the sad lament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor sees the flood that trickles form his eyes)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You are not to believe that more content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Lady Bradamant in Paris lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who can no longer her delay excuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Leo for her wedded lord refuse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Ere she herself to any consort tie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside her own Rogero, she will fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do what so can be done; her word belie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anger friends, kindred, court, and Charlemagne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if she nothing else can do, will die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By poison or her own good faulchion slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For not to live appears far lesser woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than, living, her Rogero to forego.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Rogero mine, ah! wonder gone” (she cried)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Art thou; and canst thou so far distant be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou heardest not this royal edict cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thing concealed from none, expecting thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faster than thee would none have hither hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I wot, hadst thou known this; ah! wretched me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How can I e’er in future think of aught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saving the worst that can by me be thought?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“How can it be, Rogero, thou alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hast read not what by all the world is read?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thou hast read it not, nor hither flown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How canst thou but a prisoner be, or dead?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But well I wot, that if the truth were known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This Leo will for thee some snare have spread:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The traitor will have barred thy way, intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou shouldst not him by better speed prevent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“From Charles I gained the promise, that to none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less puissant than myself should I be given:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the reliance thou wouldst be that one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With whom I should in arms have vainly striven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None I esteemed, excepting thee alone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But well my rashness is rebuked by Heaven:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since I by one am taken in this wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unfamed through life for any fair emprize.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>“If I am held as taken, since the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I had not force to take nor yet to slay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thing that is not, in my judgment, right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor I to Charles’s sentence will give way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know that I shall be esteemed as light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If what I lately said, I now unsay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But of those many ladies that have past</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For light, I am not, I, the first or last.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Enough I to my lover faith maintain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, firmer than a rock, am still found true!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And far herein surpass the female train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That were in olden days, or are in new!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, if they me as fickle shall arraign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Care I, so good from fickleness ensue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though I am lighter than a leaf be said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So I be forced not with that Greek no wed.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>These things and more beside the damsel bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(’Twixt which oft sobs and tears were interposed),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ceased not to utter through the livelong night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which upon that unhappy day had closed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, when within Cimmeria’s caverned height</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nocturnus with his troops of shades reposed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaven, which eternally had willed the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should be Rogero’s consort, brought him aid:</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>This moves the haught Marphisa, when ’tis morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To appear before the king; to whom that maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saith, “to the Child, her brother, mighty scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was done; nor should he be so ill appaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That from him should his plighted wife be torn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And nought thereof unto the warrior said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on whoever lists she will in strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prove Bradamant to be Rogero’s wife;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“And this, before all others, will prove true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On her, if to deny it she will dare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For she had to Rogero, in her view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spoken those words, which they that marry swear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with all ceremony wont and due</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So was the contract sealed between the pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They were no longer free; nor could forsake</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The one the other, other spouse to take.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>Whether Marphisa true or falsely spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I well believe that, rather with intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Young Leo’s purpose, right or wrong, to break,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than tell the truth, she speaks; and with consent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Bradamant doth that avowal make:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For to exclude the hated Leo bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of Rogero to be repossest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This she believes her shortest way and best.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Sorely by this disturbed, King Charlemagne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bade Bradamant be called, and to her told</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That which the proud Marphisa would maintain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Aymon present in the press behold!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Bradamant drops her head, nor treats as vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor vouches what avows that virgin bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In such confusion, they may well believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That fierce Marphisa speaks not to deceive.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Joy good Orlando and joy Rinaldo show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who view in valorous Marphisa’s plea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cause the alliance shall no further go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which sealed already Leo deemed to be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet, in spite of stubborn Aymon’s no,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant shall Rogero’s consort be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they may, without strife, without despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Done to Duke Aymon’s, give her to the knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>For if such words have pass’d between the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fast is the knot and cannot be untied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They what they vowed more fairly will obtain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And without further strife are these affied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“This is a plot, a plot devised in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ye deceive yourselves (Duke Aymon cried);</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, were the story true which ye have feigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believe not therefore that your cause is gained.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“For granting what I will not yet allow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what I to believe as yet demur;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That weakly to Rogero so her vow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was plighted, as Rogero’s was to her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where was the contract made, and when and how?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More clearly this to me must ye aver.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Either it was not so, I am advised;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or was before Rogero was baptized.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CX-->
			<p>
				<span>“But if it were before the youthful knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A Christian was, I will not heed it, I;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ’twixt a faithful and a paynim wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I deem that nought avails the marriage-tie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this not vainly in the doubtful fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should Constantine’s fair son have risked to die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Charlemagne for this, our sovereign lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will forfeit, I believe, his plighted word.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“What now you say you should before have said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While yet the matter was unbroke, and ere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charles at my daughter’s prayer that edict made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which has drawn Leo to the combat here.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando and Rinaldo were gainsayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So before royal Charles by Clermont’s peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And equal Charlemagne heard either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But neither would for this nor that decide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXII-->
			<p>
				<span>As in the southern or the northern breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The greenwood murmurs; and as on the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Aeolus with the god that rules the seas</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is wroth, the hoarse and hollow breakers roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So a loud rumour of this strife, that flees</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through France, and spreads and circles evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Affords such matter to rehearse and hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That nought beside is bruised far or near.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>These with Rogero, those with Leo side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the most numerous are Rogero’s friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who against Aymon, ten to one, divide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Good Charlemagne to neither party bends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But wills that cause shall be by justice tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to his parliament the matter sends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa, now the bridal was deferred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared anew, and other question stirred;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And said, “In that anther cannot have</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant, while my brother is alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let Leo, if the gentle maid he crave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His foe in listed fight of life deprive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, that sends the other to his grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Freed from his rival, with the lady wive.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith this challenge, as erewhile the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Leo was declared at Charles’ behest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Leo who if he had the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the unicorn, believed he from his foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was safe; and thought no peril would appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too hard a feat for him; and knew not how</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence into solitary woods and drear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That warrior had been hurried by his woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him gone for little time and for disport</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believed, and took his line in evil sort.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>This shortly Leo was condemned to rue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he, on whom too fondly he relied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor on that day nor on the following two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared, nor news of him were signified;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And combat with Rogero was, he knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unsafe, unless that knight was on his side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So sent, to eschew the threatened scathe and scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek the warrior of the unicorn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Through city, and through hamlet, and through town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sends to seek Rogero, far and near:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not content with this, himself is gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In person, on his steed, to find the peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But of the missing warrior tidings none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor he nor any of the Court would hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for Melissa: I for other verse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reserve myself, her doings to rehearse.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
