<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-32" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>To her that does for her Rogero stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tidings are brought which irk the damsel sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fair Marphisa caused the youth’s delay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bent to slay her, grieving evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departs, and overtakes, upon the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ullania with the three kings who rode before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These she o’ercomes, and had o’ercome that maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that an evil law she disobeyed.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>I recollect that I was bound to sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(I promised so, but it escaped my mind)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a suspicion, fraught with suffering</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Bradamant of more displeasing kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made by keener and more venomed sting</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than caused that other wound, wherewith she pined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, hearing Richardet his news impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had pierced her breast, and preyed upon her heart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>So was I bound to sing, but I begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another song, Rinaldo crossed my way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then those deeds by savage Guido done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kept me employed and caused no small delay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so from subject I to subject run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I forgot of Bradamant to say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I now remember, and will tell you, ere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You of Rinaldo or Gradasso hear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>But it behoves, ere more of these be said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I should awhile of Agramant discourse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had from that night’s raging fire conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Arles, the remnant of his scattered force:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since to unite his troops, and furnish aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And victual, ’twas a place of much resource,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seated upon a river, nigh the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Spain in front and Africa before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>With horse and foot, of good or evil sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marsilius throughout Spain their loss repairs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And each armed back in Barcellona’s port,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Furnished through love or fear, for sea prepares.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moor to council daily calls his court;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor care nor cost the watchful monarch spares:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile sore taxes and repeated cess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All Africa’s o’erburdened towns oppress.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>He offers Rodomont, if to his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will return, but offers him in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Renowned Almontes’ daughter, as a bride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His cousin she, her portion Oran’s reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He lures not from his bridge that knight of pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who has so many sells, such plate and chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Collected there, from cavaliers o’erthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As serve to hide the monumental stone,</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa would not such a course pursue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay, the redoubted damsel hearing said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That Agramant, subdued by Charles’s crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—His choicest warriors taken, chased, or dead⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Arles was sheltered with his broken few,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, unbidden by the monarch, sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prompt to assist him with her friendly blade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And proffered purse and person in his aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>As a free gift to him the martial fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brunello bore, nor had she done him wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, for ten days and nights, to swing in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had sorely feared, from lofty gallows hung:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But seeing him unhelped by force or prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of any one amid the paynim throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She thought foul scorn to stain her generous hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such base blood, and loosed the losel’s bands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She pardoned every ancient injury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him to Agramant in Arles conveyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well may you fancy with what joy and glee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch greeted her who brought him aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He in Brunello’s fate wills all shall see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In what esteem he holds that warlike maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he in earnest does upon her foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What fierce Marphisa menaced but in show.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>The hangman hung his corpse in desert field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The craving vulture and the crow to feed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, that erewhile had been his shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the noose that caitiff would have freed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaven’s justice willed, now lay with wound unhealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor could assist the craven in his need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when the news were known, the knot was tied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that Brunello, unassisted, died.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>This while does good duke Aymon’s daughter mourn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because those twenty days so slowly trail:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Which term elapsed⁠—Rogero should return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be received into her church’s pale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Time halts not more with him to foreign bourne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exiled, with prisoner pent in noisome jail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pines the poor wretch for liberty and light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or his loved land, desired and gladsome sight!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>Aye sick with hope deferred, the expecting maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Phoebus’ steeds were foundered one while deemed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then that his wheels were out of frame, so stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond the wonted term, his chariot seemed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet longer than <em>that</em> day when Faith delayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sun, which on the righteous Hebrew beamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or than <em>that</em> night Alcides was conceived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She every day and every night believed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>How oft of dormouse, badger, or of bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heavy slumber would she fain partake!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For she that time in sleep would waste and wear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor such prolonged repose desired to break;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor wished the damsel any sound to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until Rogero’s voice should her awake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not alone is this beyond her power;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She cannot close her eyes one single hour.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She here and there, throughout the livelong night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tosses and turns, nor ever finds repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still, impatient for the dawn of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From time to time she to her window goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see if Tithon’s spouse the lily white</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet scatters mingled with the crimson rose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor less desires the damsel, when ’tis morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see the golden stars the heaven adorn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>When, saving some four days, the term was ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appointed for the youthful warrior’s stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, full of hope, the messenger attended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From hour to hour, that should arrive, and say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Behold Rogero comes;” and oft ascended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A turret, from whose top she might survey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gay champaign, wood, and, mid the wide expanse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A portion of the road, that led to France.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>When shining arms at distance she perceives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or any thing that speaks a cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis her desired Rogero, she believes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her fair eyes and brows are seen to clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If footman, or unarmed, the maid conceives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It is a courier from the youthful peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, though fallacious every hope she feeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another and another aye succeeds.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And then she arms, and will the warrior meet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the hill descends into the plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She finds him not, and to Montalban’s seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hopes he by other road his way has ta’en.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the design, wherewith she moved her feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From thence, she to her fort returns in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor finds him here nor there; meanwhile expired</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The period whose approach she so desired.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>—The period so prefixt o’erpast by one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By two, three, six, by eight, by twenty days⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She seeing not her spouse, and tidings none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Receiving of the youth, laments ’gan raise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had from snake-haired Furies pity won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In those dark realms that Rhadamanthus sways.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She smote her eyes divine, and bosoms fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She rent the tresses of her golden hair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Can it be true?”⁠—(she cried)⁠—“Shall I be fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To follow one, that strives to hide and fly?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteem a man that has me in disdain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pray him that never hears my suppliant cry?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suffer who hates me o’er my heart to reign?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One that his lofty virtues holds so high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twere need some heaven-born goddess should descend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From realms above, his stubborn heart to bend?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Proud youth! he knows my worship and my love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor me will have for lover or for slave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cruel stripling knows what pangs I prove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet will not aid me till I am in my grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor let me tell my sorrows, lest they move</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him his perverse and evil will to wave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shunning me like malignant asp, that fears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To change his mood, if he the charmer hears.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Ah! Love, arrest this wight who runs so free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outstripping my slow feet, or me install</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the condition whence thou tookest me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such as I was, ere thine or other’s thrall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Alas! how vain the hope! that thou shouldst be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ever to pity moved by suppliant call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who sport, yea feed and live, in streams that rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the distracted lover’s brimming eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“But, woe is me, alas! and, what can I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save my irrational desire lament?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which makes me soar a pitch so passing high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I reach a region, where my plumes are brent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, unsustained, fall headlong from the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ends my woe; on other flight intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again I imp my wings, again I soar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To flame and fall, tormented evermore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Yea; rather of myself should I complain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than the desire, to which I bared my breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereby was Reason hunted from her reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all my powers by stronger force opprest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus borne from bad to worse, without a rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I cannot the unbridled beast arrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who makes me see I to destruction haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I more bitterness in death may taste.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Yet, ah! why blame myself? Wherein have I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ever offended, save in loving thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What wonder was it then that suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A woman’s feeble sense opprest should be?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why fence and guard myself, lest bearing high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wise words, and beauty rare should pleasure me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Most wretched is the mortal that would shun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To look upon the visage of the sun.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Besides that me my destiny entrained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Words, worthy credence, moved me much, that drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A picture of rare happiness, ordained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As meed of this fair unless to ensue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If these persuasive words were false and feigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If famous Merlin’s counsel was untrue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wrath at the wizard may I well profess;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But cannot therefore love Rogero less.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Both Merlin and Melissa have I need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To blame, and shall for ever blame the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, to exhibit suckers of my seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conjured up spirits from infernal reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with this empty hope my fancy feed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me in perpetual bondage to detain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor other cause for this can I suppose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save that they grudge me safe and sweet repose.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Sorrow the maid so wholly occupies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Room has she none for comfort or for rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet, maugre her affliction, Hope will rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And form a lodgement in her harassed breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the damsel’s memory still supplies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero’s parting words to her addrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So makes her, in all seeming facts, despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Await from hour to hour the youthful knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>For a month’s space beyond those twenty days</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This hope affords fair Bradamant content:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence sorrow not on her so heavy weighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As it would else her harassed soul have shent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, one day that along the road she strays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which she oft to meet Rogero went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hears tidings, that of Hope⁠—last comfort left⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Like every other good) her breast bereft.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Bound homeward from the hostile camp, where lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Agramant, she met a Gascon knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A prisoner to those paynims, from the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That fought nigh Paris was the famous fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel prest him all he knew to say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to the point she covets led the knight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Asks of Rogero, on that theme abides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Listens to that, not aught inquires besides.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Of him a full account did he afford,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well acquainted with the court; he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“How, matched with Mandricardo, strove that lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And layed the martial king in combat dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how, sore wounded by the Tartar’s sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above a month the stripling kept his bed:”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had the stranger here but closed his news,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well might his tale the missing knight excuse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>But then subjoins the Gascon cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“How in the Moorish camp a damsel lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By name Marphisa hight, of beauteous cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bold and as skilled in arms of every guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who loves Rogero and to him is dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then the host so rarely sundered spies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That every one, throughout the paynim train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deems that betrothed in wedlock are the twain;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“And hope, when healed shall be the youthful knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The marriage of those lovers will succeed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For sure) with pleasure and sincere delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those tidings paynim prince and monarch read:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since, knowing either’s superhuman might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They augur, from their loins will spring a breed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In little season, which shall pass in worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mightiest race that ever was on earth.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>What he rehearsed, the Gascon knight believed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor without cause believed the news he bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A rumour universally received</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bruited through the squadrons of the Moor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had that notion of their love conceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From signs of kindness witnessed evermore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For⁠—good or bad⁠—though from one mouth it flows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fame to a boundless torrent quickly grows.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>That she with him had brought the Paynim aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ne’er was seen without the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first foundation of the rumour layed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But what confirmed that fame in every ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was, that she, having from the camp conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thief Brunello (as I sang whilere)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if alone to see Rogero brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had to the camp returned, uncalled, unsought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>She solely to the camp had ta’en her way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To visit him that on a sick-bed smarted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor once alone; but often all the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There passed that maid, and but at eve departed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who gave yet greater cause of her to say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That⁠—known as one so haughty and hard-hearted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who all the world despised⁠—she now was grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Benign and humble to the Child alone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>When Bradamant the Gascon’s story heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That lady suffered such tormenting pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such cruel woe her inmost bosom stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From falling she preserved herself with pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She turned her courser round, without a word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflamed with jealousy and fierce disdain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From her all hope the wretched damsel spurns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to her chamber breathing wrath returns.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Turned on her face, her body on the bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed as she is, th4e grieving damsel throws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that the sad lament by sorrow bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May be unheard of any, bites the clothes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so, repeating what the stranger said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To such a pitcher her smothered anguish grows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her plaints no longer able to restrain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So vents the maid parforce her piteous pain:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Who ever can be trusted? woe is me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All false and cruel well may be esteemed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thou, Rogero, false and cruel be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I so pious and so faithful deemed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What foul and felon act, what treachery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was ever yet by tragic poet dreamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But will fall short of thine, if thou wilt set</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sum of my desert, against thy debts?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Wherefore, Rogero, since no cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mates thee in beauteous form and daring feat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since thou in matchless valour hast no peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And none with thee in gentleness compete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why cannot we, ’mid godlike gifts and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Allow thee truth, thy graces to complete?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The praise of spotless truth to thee allow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To which all other virtues yield and bow?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Knowest thou not, without it, worthless are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All gentle bearing and all martial might?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As there is nothing, howsoever fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That can be seen without the aid of light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Easily mightest thou a maid ensnare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lord as thou was, and idol in her sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her with thy honied words thou might’st have won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To deem that cold and darksome was the sun.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>“Cruel, what sin can trouble thee, if thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do’st not her murder who loved <em>thee</em> repent?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If held so lightly be a breach of vow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath what burden will thy heart be bent?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What treatment will thine adversary know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If one who loves like me thou so torment?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Justice is none in heaven, I well may say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If Heaven its vengeance for my wrongs delay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>“If of all human sins of deepest dye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be fell ingratitude; if doomed to smart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this, the fairest angel of the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was banished into foul and darksome part;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If mighty sins for mighty vengeance cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where due atonement cleanses not the heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beware lest thou beneath such vengeance groan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ingrate! that wouldest not thy sin atone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Cruel Rogero, I of theft, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All other sins, may justly thee arraign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou my heart has ravished form my side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Of this offence I will not, I complain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, having made it mine, that thou defied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All right, and took away thy gift again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Restore it; well thou know’st what pains requite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His sin, who keeps what is another’s right.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Thou hast left <em>me</em>, Rogero; <em>thee</em> to leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! I neither will nor power possess.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But will and power have I my life to reave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To scape from this o’erwhelming wretchedness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To die at strife with thee alone I grieve:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, had the gods so pleased my lot to bless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to require my life, when loved of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never so welcome had been death to me.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Resolved to die, ’twas so the damsel cried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And starting from her bed, by passion warmed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her left breast her naked sword applied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then recollected she was wholly armed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile her better Spirit, at her side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With these persuasive words her fury charmed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“O lady, born to such illustrious name!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would’st thou conclude thy life with such foul shame?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Were it not better to the field to go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where aye thy breath with glory may be spent?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There, should Rogero chance to lay thee low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to have slain thee haply may repent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, should his faulchion deal the mortal blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What death could ever yield thee more content?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reason it were thou should’st by him be slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who dooms thee living to such passing pain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Haply of that Marphisa, too, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou die, thou yet may deadly vengeance take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with dishonest love and treacherous lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did thy beloved Rogero’s fealty shake.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This seemed to please the mournful lady more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than her first thought; and she forthwith bade make</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mantle for her arms, which should imply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her desperation and desire to die.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The vest is of that colour which is spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In leaf, when gray and yellow are at strife;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When it is gathered from the branch, or dried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is the green blood, that was it’s parent’s life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embroidered is the surcoat’s outer side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With stems of cypress which disdain the knife;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which shoot not, when by biting steel laid low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A habit well according with her woe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She took the courser that was wont to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho, and with him the lance of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whose sole touch unhorsed all champions were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Needless anew I deem it to unfold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why by Astolpho given, and when and where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or how that spear obtained the warrior bold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady took the lance, but nothing guessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the stupendous virtue it possessed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Without attendants, without squire, alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hill descending by the nearest way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Toward Paris is the mournful damsel gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where camped erewhile the Moorish forces lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For yet to her the tidings were unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That good Rinaldo and his bold array</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had raised, with Charles’ and Malagigi’s aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The siege the paynims had to Paris laid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>—Cadurci, and Cahors<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-381" id="noteref-381" epub:type="noteref">381</a> city left behind⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant sees the mountain, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence Dordogne’s waters to the valley wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Montferrant’s and Clermont’s towers appear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When she, a lady fair, of semblance kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beholds, by that same road, towards her steer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Three knights were nigh, and⁠—at the pommel hung⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A buckler from the damsel’s saddle swung.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>Before the lady and behind her ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More squires and maids, a numerous company.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair Bradamant of one that past beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Demanded, “who the stranger dame might be?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That lady to the king of France” (replied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The squire) “is sent upon an embassy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From <b>The Lost Isle</b>, which lies mid seas that roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their restless waves beyond the northern pole.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Some <b>The Lost Isle</b>, some Iceland call the reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereof a royal lady fills the throne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose charms (before those charms all beauties wane)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are such as Heaven had dealt to her alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The shield you see she sends to Charlemagne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with the pact and purpose plainly shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He should confer it on the knight, whose worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is, in his judgment, fairest upon earth.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“She, as she deems herself (and it is true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She <em>is</em> the fairest of all womankind),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cavalier, that should in heart and thew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surpass all other warriors, fain would find;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved, should her a hundred thousand woo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">None shall unfix the purpose of her mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—But he, held worthiest by the world’s accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone shall be her lover and her lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“In France, in royal Charles’s famous court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel hopes to find the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in a thousand feats of high report</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has shown that he excels each puissant peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All three are monarchy who the dame escort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what their kingdoms ye as well shall hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One Sweden rules, one Gothland, Norway one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surpast in martial praise by few or none.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>“These three, whose kingdoms at some distance lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet the least distant lie from the <b>Lost Isle</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Because few mariners its shore descry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As little known, that island so they style),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wooed and yet woo her for a wife, and vie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In valour, and, to win the lady’s smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Illustrious deeds have done, which Fame shall sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While Heaven shall circle in its wonted round.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Yet she not these will wed, nor cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That does not, as she deems, all else excell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—‘Lightly I hold your proof of valour here,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Those northern monarchs was she wont to tell)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘And if, like sun amid the stars, one peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outshines his fellows, him I honour well:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But therefore hold him not, in fierce alarms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of living men the bravest knight at arms.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘To Charlemagne, whom I esteem and hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As wisest among reigning kings, by me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall be dispatched a costly shield of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On pact and on condition, that it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bestowed on him, deemed boldest of the bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid the martial ranks of chivalry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Serves the king Charlemagne or other lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will be governed by that king’s award.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘If when King Charles the buckler shall receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And give to one so stout, that best among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All others he that warrior shall believe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do they to his or other court belong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For me the golden buckler shall retrieve</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One of you three, in his own virtue strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My every love and thought shall he possess;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him for my spouse and lord will I confess.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Moved by these stirring speeches, hither hie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From that wide-distant sea, those monarchs bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved to win the buckler, or to die</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath his hand who has that shield of gold.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant ponders much the squire’s reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He give his horse the head⁠—his story told⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And plies him so with restless heel and hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He overtakes the damsel’s distant band.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>After him gallops not, nor hurries ought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant, who pursues her road at ease:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much evermore evolving in her thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Things that may chance, she finally foresees</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That through the buckler by that damsel brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will follow strife and boundless enmities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid king Charles’s peerage and the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If with that shield he shall reward the best.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>This grieved the damsel’s heart, but far above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That grief, the former fear her heard did goad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That young Rogero had withdrawn his love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From her, and on the warlike queen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-382" id="noteref-382" epub:type="noteref">382</a> bestowed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So buried in the thoughts wherewith she strove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was Bradamant, she heeded nor her road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor took she care where, at the close of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To find befitting shelter for the night.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>As when from squall, or other chance, a barge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drives from the river-side, where late it lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under no mariner or pilot’s charge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The winds and waves at will transport their prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So Rabican with Bradamant, at large,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—She musing on Rogero⁠—wends his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thence, by many miles, was distant wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That mind which should her courser’s bridle guide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She raised her eyes at last, and saw the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had turned his back on Bocchus’ towers and wall;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-383" id="noteref-383" epub:type="noteref">383</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, like a cormorant, his journey done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into his nurse’s lap beheld him fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond Marocco; and for her to run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To tree, for shelter from the rising squall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had been a foolish thought: for now ’gan blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A blustering wind, which threatened rain or snow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>To better speed fair Bradamant aroused</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her courser, yet but little way did ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When with his flock, which on the champaign browsed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving the fields, a shepherd she espied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him where, well or ill, she might be housed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—With many instances the maid applied⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“For never house could such ill shelter yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that in rain ’twere worse to lodge afield.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>To her the shepherd said, “I know of none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereto I could direct you, near at hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least six leagues are distant all, but one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Named <b>Tristram’s Tower</b>, throughout the neighbouring land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not to all men is the door undone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For it behoves that they, with lance in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Achieve their footing first and the defend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to be lodged within its walls pretend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“If there be room within, to stranger knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The castellain gives kindly welcome there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But is a lodging claimed by other wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To joust with all new comers makes him swear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If none, he need not move; but arms and fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He must what stranger thither shall repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he that worst his warlike arms shall ply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must wander forth beneath the naked sky.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“If two, three, four, or more, seek shelter, they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That first arrive, in peace their quarters take.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who follows, has a harder game to play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For war upon those many must he make.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, if one only in that mansion stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with those two, or more, a lance must break,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then with as many others as succeed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus he what strength he has shall sorely need.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“As well, if wife or maid seek that repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Is she alone, is she accompanied),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And afterwards another, the most fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is housed; that other must without abide.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant asked the kindly shepherd where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That castle stood; and he with signs replied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well as words, and pointed with his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, five or six miles wide, the tower did stand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Though Rabican’s good paces merit praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hurry him the damsel had no skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By those so passing foul and broken ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(By season somewhat rainy rendered ill)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, as to reach the tower, ere Night o’erlays</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The world, whose every nook dark shadows fill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived, that lady finds the portal barred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And “that she seeks a lodging,” tells the guard.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>He answers, “that the place is occupied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By dame and knight already housed, who, met</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About the fire, in that chill evening tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wait till their supper be before them set.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him that maid; “The board is not supplied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I deem, for them, unless the meal be eat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, say I wait their coming.” (she pursues)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Who know and will observe your castle’s use.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The guard his message bore, where at their ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reposed the weary cavaliers; his tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not overlikely was those kings to please;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For cold and peevish blew the wintry gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now fast fell the rain; yet, forced to seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their arms, they slowly don the martial mail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest remain within; while they proceed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the damsel, but with little speed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Three cavaliers they were, of might so tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Few champions but to them in prowess yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The same that she that very day, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The courier maid, encountered in the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They that in Iceland boasted, in their pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bear away from France the golden shield:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who (for they had the martial maid outrode)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived before her at that lord’s abode.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>In feats of arms few warriors were more stout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But she besure will be among those few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, that on no account will wait without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fasting and wet, night’s weary watches through.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within from window and from lodge, the rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Look forth, and will the joust by moonlight view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which streams from underneath a covering cloud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit the furious rain beats fast and loud.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Such transport as the longing gallant cheers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About to seize the stolen fruits of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, after long delay, the listener hears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bolt within its socket softly move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such transport cheered her, of those cavaliers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prowess and the pith a-fire to prove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When now the opened portals she descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And drawbridge dropt, and issuing knights espied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>When she beheld, how, of the drawbridge clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those knights, together or scarce sundered, came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She took her ground; and next in fierce career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With flowing bridle, drove the furious dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Levelling against those kings that virtuous spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her cousin’s gift which never missed its aim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose touch each warrior must unseat parforce;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yea Mars, should Mars contend in mortal course.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The king of Sweden, foremost of those knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In falling too is foremost of the train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such surpassing force his helmet smites</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That spear, which never yet was couched in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gothland’s good king next meets the maid, and lights</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With feet in air, at distance on the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The third (unhorsed by Aymon’s beauteous daughter)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Half buried lies in mire and marshy water.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>When at three strokes she had unhorsed them all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lighting with head on earth and heels in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Retiring from the field, she sought the Hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In search of lodging; but, ere harboured there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To issue forth, at whosoever’s call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is, by the warder’s hest, obliged to swear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That lord who well had weighed her famous feats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel with surpassing honour greets.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>So does by her the lady, that erewhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had thither journeyed, with those monarchs three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As I related, sent from the <b>Lost Isle</b>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To France’s king, upon an embassy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kind as she is and affable of style,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She renders back the stranger’s courtesy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rises to welcome her with smiling air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the fire conducts that warlike fair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>As Bradamant unarms, and first her shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And after puts her polished casque away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A caul of shining gold, wherein concealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And clustering close, her prisoned tresses lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She with the helmet doffs; and now revealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(While the long locks about her shoulders play,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lovely damsel by that band is seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No fiercer in affray than fair of mien.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>As when the stage’s curtain is uprolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mid thousand lamps, appears the mimic scene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Adorned with arch and palace, pictures, gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And statues; or, as limpid and serene</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sun his visage, glorious to behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unveils, emerging from a cloudy screen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So when the lady doffs her iron case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All paradise seems opened in her face.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Already so well-grown and widely spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were the bright tresses which the hermit shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These, gathered in a knot, behind her head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though shorter than their wont, the damsel wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, that castle’s master, plainly read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Who often had beheld her face before)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That this was Bradamant; and now he paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet higher honours to the martial maid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>With modest and with mirthful talk this while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seated about the fire, they feed the ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in this way the weary time beguile</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till they are heartened with more solid cheer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“If new or ancient were his castle’s style,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Bradamant asks the courteous cavalier)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“By whom begun, and how it took its rise?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus that castellain to her replies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“When Pharamond of France possessed the throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His son, prince Clodion, had a mistress rare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And damsel in that ancient age was none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More graceful, beauteous, or more debonair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So loved of Pharamond’s enamoured son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he lost sight no oftener of the fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Io’s shepherd of his charge whilere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For jealous as enamoured was the peer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Her in this mansion, which his sire bestowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He kept, and rarely issued from his rest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him were lodged ten cavaliers, allowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through France to be the boldest and the best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hither, while in this castle he abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Tristram and a dame their course addrest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom from a furious giant, in her need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Short time before that gentle knight had freed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Sir Tristram and his lady reached the Hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When now the sun had Seville left behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They for admission on the porter call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since they for ten miles round no shelter find.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Clodion, that loved much, and was withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore jealous, was determined in his mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No stranger in his keep should ever inn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So long as that fair lady lodged therein.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“When, after long entreaties made in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The castellain refused to house the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He said, ‘What supplication cannot gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I hope to make thee do in they despite;’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And loudly challenged him, with all his train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those ten which he maintained, to bloody fight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Offering, with levelled lance and lifted glaive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To prove Sir Clodion a discourteous knave;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“On pact, if he sate fast, and overthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should be the warder, and his warlike rout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He in that castle should be lodged alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Clodion with his knights remain without.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Against him goes the king of France’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At risque of death, to venge that galling flout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But falls astound; the rest partake his fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the losers Tristram bars the gate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Entering the tower, he finds her harboured there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereof I spake, so dear in Clodion’s eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom <b>She</b> had equalled with the loveliest fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nature, so niggard of such courtesies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her Sir Tristram talks, while fell despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye racks the houseless prince in horrid wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who prays the conquering knight, with suppliant cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not to his arms the damsel to deny.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Though she small worth in Tristram’s sight possess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor any, saving Yseult, please his sight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-384" id="noteref-384" epub:type="noteref">384</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor other dame to love or to caress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The philtre, drunk erewhile, allows the knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet, for he would that foul discourteousness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Clodion with a fit revenge requite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He cries, ‘I deem it were foul wrong and sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If so such beauty I should shut the door.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘And, should Sir Clodion grieve beneath the tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To lodge alone, and company demand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although less beautiful, I have with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fair and youthful damsel, here at hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, I am well content, his mate shall be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And do in all things, as he shall command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But she that is most fair to the most strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meseemeth, in all justice should belong.’</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Shut out all night, the moody Clodion strayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Puffing and pacing round his lofty tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if that prince the sentinel had played</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On them, that slept at ease in lordly bower:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, sorer far than wind and cold dismayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That lovely lady’s loss in Tristram’s power:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he, with pity touched, upon the morrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rendered her back, and so relieved his sorrow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Because,’ he said, and made it plain appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Such as he found her, he returned the fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And though for his discourtesy whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clodion had every scorn deserved to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He was content with having made the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outwatch the weary night in open air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accepting not that cavalier’s excuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would have thrown on Love his castle’s use.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘For Love should make a churlish nature kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not transform to rude a gentle breast.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Tristram hence was gone, not long behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remained the enamoured prince who changed his rest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first he to a cavalier consigned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tower; whereof that baron he possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On pact, that he and his in the domain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Henceforth this usage ever should maintain;”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“That cavalier of greater heart and power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should in this hall be harboured without fail:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They that less worthy were should void the tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seek another inn, by hill or dale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fine, that law was fixt, which to this hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Endures, as you have seen;” while so his tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Bradamant recounts that castle’s lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sewer with savoury meats has heaped the board.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>In the great hall that plenteous board was laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(None fairer was in all the world beside)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then came where those beauteous ladies stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And them, with torches lit, did thither guide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On entering, Bradamant the room surveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she, that other fair, on every side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who as they gaze about the gorgeous hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Filled full of picture, mark each storied wall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>So beauteous are the figures, that instead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of eating, on the painted walls they stare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit of meat they have no little need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who wearied sore with that day’s labour are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With grief the sewer, with grief the cook takes heed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How on the table cools the untasted fare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nay, there is one amid the crowd, who cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“First fill your bellies, and then feast your eyes.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The guests were placed, and now about to eat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When suddenly bethought that castellain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To house two damsels were a thing unmeet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One lady must dislodge, and one remain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fairest stay, and she least fair retreat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where howls the wind, where beats the pattering rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because they separate came, ’tis ordered so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One lady must remain, one lady go.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The lord some matrons of his household crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calls, with two elders, in such judgments wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He marks the dames, and bids them of the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Declare which is most beauteous in their eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all, upon examination due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cry, Aymon’s daughter best deserves the prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vouch as she in might those kings outweighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less in beauty she surpassed the maid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The warder cries to that Islandic dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who of her sentence has a shrewd suspicion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“O lady, let it be no cause of blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That we observe our usage and condition;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek some other rest must be thine aim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since, by our universal band’s admission,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though unadorned that martial maid be seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou canst not match her charms and lovely mien.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>As in a moment’s time a cloud obscure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Steams from the bottom of some marshy dale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the sun’s visage, late so bright and pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mantles all over with its dingy veil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that poor damsel, sentenced to endure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without, the pelting shower and blustering gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is seen to change her cheer, and is no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fair and mirthful maid she was before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>The maid turns pale, and all her colour flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who dreads so stern a sentence to obey:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But generous Bradamant, in prudent guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who could not bear to see her turned away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cried to that baron, “Partial and unwise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your judgment seems, as well all judgments may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein the losing party has not room</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To plead before the judge pronounces doom.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>“I, who this cause take on me to defend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say (whether fairer or less fair I be)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I came not as a woman, nor intend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That now mine actions shall be womanly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, saving I undress, who shall pretend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To say I am or am not such as she?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Neither should aught be said but what we know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And least of all what works another woe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Many, as well as I, long tresses wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet are not therefore women; if, as guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I have admittance gained to your repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like woman or like man, is manifest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then why should I the name of woman bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in my actions stand a man confest?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis ruled that woman should a woman chase;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor that a knight a woman should displace.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Grant we (what I confess not howsoe’er)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That you the woman in my visage read;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that in beauty I am not her peer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not therefore, deem I, of my valour’s meed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye would deprive me, though in beauteous cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The palm I to that damsel should concede.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twere hard, before I yield to her in charms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I should forfeit what I won in arms.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>“And if it be your usage, that the dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who yields in beauty, from your tower must wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here to remain I my design to proclaim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should my resolve have good or evil game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence I infer, unequal were the game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she and I in beauty should contend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if such strife ’twixt her and me ensues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nought can the damsel gain, and much may lose;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“And save the gain and loss well balanced be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In every match, the contest is unfair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that by right, no less than courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May she a shelter claim in you repair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But are there any here that disagree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to impugn my equal sentence dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold my prompt, at such gainsayer’s will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To prove my judgment right, his judgment ill!”</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Bradamant⁠—grieved that maid of gentle kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should from that castle wrongfully be sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bide the raging of the rain and wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where sheltering house was none, nor even shed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With reasons good, in wary speech combined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Persuades that lord; but mostly what she said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On ending silences the knight; and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Allows the justice of that damsel’s plea.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As when hot summer sun the soil has rived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And most the thirsty plant of moisture drains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The weak and wasting flower, well nigh deprived</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that quick sap which circled in its veins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sucks in the welcome rain, and is revived;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, when bold Bradamant so well maintains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The courier maid’s defence, her beauteous cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mirth revive, and brighten as whilere.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIX-->
			<p>
				<span>At length the supper, which had long been dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet was touched, enjoys each hungry guest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor any further news of errant knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Them, seated at the festive board, molest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All, saving Bradamant, enjoy, whose sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As wont, is still afflicted and opprest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that suspicious fear, that doubt unjust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which racked her bosom, marred the damsel’s gust.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CX-->
			<p>
				<span>The supper done⁠—brought sooner to a close</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply from their desire to feast their eyes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First of the set, Duke Aymon’s daughter rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next the courier maid is seen to rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that the warder signs to one, that goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many torches fires in nimble wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose light on storied wall and ceiling fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What followed shall another canto tell.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
