<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-41" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>CANTO 41</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>His prisoners to the Child the Danish peer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consigns, who, homeward bound, are wrecked at sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By swimming he escapes, and a sincere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faithful servant now of Christ is he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meanwhile bold Brandimart, and Olivier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Roland fiercely charge the hostile three.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sobrino is left wounded in the strife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gradasso and Agramant deprived of life.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>The odour which well-fashioned bear or hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that which find and dainty raiment steeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of gentle stripling, or of damsel fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Who often love awakens, as she weeps —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If it ooze forth and scent the ambient air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And which for many a day its virtue keeps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well shows, by manifest effects and sure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How perfect was its first perfume and pure.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>The drink that to his cost good Icarus drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of yore his sun-burned sicklemen to cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And which ('tis said) lured Celts and Boi through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our Alpine hills, untouched by toil whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well shows that cordial was the draught, when new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since it preserves its virtue through the year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tree to which its wintry foliage cleaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well shows that verdant were its spring tide leaves.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>The famous lineage, for so many years</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of courtesy the great and lasting light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which ever, brightening as it burns, appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To shine and flame more clearly to the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well proves the sire of Este's noble peers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must, amid mortals, have shone forth as bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all fair gifts which raise men to the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the glad sun mid glittering orbs on high.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>As in his every other feat exprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero's valiant mind and courteous lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were showed by tokens clear and manifest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his high mindedness shone more and more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— So toward the Dane those virtues stood confest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With whom (as I rehearsed to you before)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had belied his mighty strength and breath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For pity loth to put that lord to death.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>The Danish warrior was well certified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No wish to slay him had the youthful knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who spared him now, when open was his side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, when so wearied he no more could smite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When finally he knew, and plain descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero scrupled to put forth his might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If with less vigour and less prowess steeled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least in courtesy he would not yield.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Pardi, sir, make we peace;" (he said) "success</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this contention cannot fall to me —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cannot be mine; for I myself confess</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conquered and captive to thy courtesy."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him Rogero answered, "And no less</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I covet peace, than 'tis desired by thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But this upon condition, that those seven</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are freed from bondage, and to me are given."</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>With that he showed those seven whereof I spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bound and with drooping heads, a sad array;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Adding, he must to him no hindrance make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would those kings to Africa convey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Dudon thus allowed the Child to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those seven, and him allowed to bear away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A bark as well; what likes him best he chooses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid those vessels, and for Africk looses.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He looses bark and sail; and in bold wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trusting the fickle wind, to seaward stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At first on her due course the vessel flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fills the pilot full of hardihood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beach retreats, and from the sailors' eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So fades, the sea appears a shoreless flood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the darkening of the day, the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Displays its fickle and perfidious kind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>It shifts from poop to beam, from beam to prow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And even there short season doth remain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The reeling ship confounds the pilot; now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Struck fore, now aft, now on her beam again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threatening the billows rise, with haughty brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Neptune's white herd lows above the main.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As many deaths appear to daunt that rout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As waves which beat their troubled bark about.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>Now blows the wind in front, and now in rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And drives this wave an-end, that other back;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Others the reeling vessel's side o'erpeer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every billow threatens equal wrack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pilot sighs, confused and pale with fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vainly he calls aloud to shift the tack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To strike or jibe the yard; and with his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Signs to the crew the thing he would command.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>But sound or signal little boots; the eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sees not amid the dim and rainy night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The voice unheard ascends into the sky, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sky, which with a louder larum smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The troubled sailors' universal cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And roar of waters, which together fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unheard is every hest, above, below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Starboard or larboard, upon poop or prow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>In the strained tackle sounds a hollow roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein the struggling wind its fury breaks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The forked lightning flashes evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With fearful thunder heaven's wide concave shakes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One to the rudder runs, one grasps an oar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each to his several office him betakes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One will make fast, another will let go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Water into the water others throw.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Lo! howling horribly, the sounding blast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Boreas in his sudden fury blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scourges with tattered sail the reeling mast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Almost as high as heaven the water flows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The oars are broken; and so fell and fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That tempest pelts, the prow to leeward goes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the ungoverned vessel's battered side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is undefended from the foaming tide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Fallen on her starboard side, on her beam ends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About to turn keel uppermost, she lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile, his soul to Heaven each recommends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surer than sure to sink, with piteous cries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scathe upon scathe malicious Fortune sends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when one woe is weathered, others rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O'erstrained, the vessel splits; and through her seams</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In many a part the hostile water streams.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>A fierce assault and cruel coil doth keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon all sides that wintry tempest fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now to their sight so high the billows leap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seems that these to heaven above would swell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, plunging with the wave, they sink so deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they appear to spy the gulfs of hell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Small hope there is or none: with faultering breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They gaze upon inevitable death.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>On a despiteous sea, that livelong night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They drifted, as the wind in fury blew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The furious wind that with the dawning light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should have abated, gathered force anew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! a bare rock, ahead, appears in sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which vainly would the wretched band eschew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom towards that cliff, in their despite, impel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The raging tempest and the roaring swell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Three times and four the pale-faced pilot wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tiller with a vigorous push to sway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for the bark a surer passage sought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the waves snapt and bore the helm away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To lower, or ease the bellying canvas aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sailors had no power; nor time had they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To mend that ill, or counsel what was best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For them too hard the mortal peril prest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Perceiving now that nothing can defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their bark from wreck on that rude rock and bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All to their private aims alone attend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And only to preserve their life have care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who quickest can, into the skiff descend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But in a thought so overcrowded are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through those so many who invade the boat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, gunwale-deep, she scarce remains afloat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero, on beholding master, mate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And men abandoning the ship with speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In doublet, as he is, sans mail and plate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hopes in the skiff, a refuge in that need:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But finds her overcharged with such a weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And afterwards so many more succeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the o'erwhelming wave the pinnace drown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she with all her wretched freight goes down;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>Goes down, and, foundering, drags with her whoe'er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving the larger bark, on her relies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then doleful shrieks are heard, 'mid sob and tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calling for succour on unpitying skies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for short space that shrilling cry they rear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, swoln with rage and scorn, the waters rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in a moment wholly stop the vent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence issues that sad clamour and lament.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>One sinks outright, no more to reappear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some rise, and bounding with the billows go:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their course, with head uplifted, others steer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An arm, an unshod leg, those others show:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, who the tempest will not fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Springs upward to the surface from below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And little distant sees that rock, in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eschewed by him and his attendant train.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Himself with hands and feet the warrior rows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping by force thereof to win the shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Breast boldly the importunate flood, and blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his unwearied breath the foam before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waxing meanwhile, the troubled water rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the rock the abandoned vessel bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quitted of those unhappy men, who die</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So curst their lot) the death from which they fly.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Alas! for man's deceitful thoughts and blind!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ship escaped from wreck, where hope was none;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When master and when men their charge resigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let the vessel without guidance run.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It would appear the wind has changed its mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On seeing all that sailed in her are gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And blows the vessel from those shallows free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through better course, into a safer sea.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>She, having drifted wildly with her guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without him, made directly Africk's strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two or three miles of waste Biserta wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the quarter facing Egypt's land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as the sea went down and the wind died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood bedded in that weary waste of sand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now thither Roland roved, who paced the shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As I in other strain rehearsed before;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>And willing to discover if alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laden, or light, the stranded vessel were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, Olivier, and Monodantes' son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aboard her in a shallow bark repair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the hatchways they descend, but none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of human kind they see; and only there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Find good Frontino, with the trenchant sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gallant armour of his youthful lord;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Who was so hurried in his hasty flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had not even time to take his sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Orlando known; which, Balisardo hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was his erewhile; the tale's upon record,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ye have read it all, as well I wite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How Falerina lost it to that lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When waste as well her beauteous bowers he laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how from him Brunello stole the blade;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And how beneath Carena, on the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brunello on Rogero this bestowed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How matchless was that faulchion's edge and grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him experience had already showed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say, Orlando; who was therefore fain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to heaven's king with grateful thanks o'erflowed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deemed, and often afterwards so said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaven for such pressing need had sent the blade:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Such pressing need, in that he had to fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the redoubted king of Sericane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knew that he, besides his fearful might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was lord of Bayard and of Durindane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not knowing them, Anglantes' valiant knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So highly rated not the plate and chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he that these had proved: they valour were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But valued less as good than rich and fair;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And, for of harness he had little need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charmed, and against all weapons fortified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Olivier he left the warlike weed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not so the sword; which to his waist he tied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Brandimart Orlando gave the steed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus equally that spoil would he divide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his companions twain, in equal share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who partners in that rich discovery were.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Against the day of fight, in goodly gear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And new, those warriors seek their limbs to deck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blazoned upon Orlando's shield appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The burning bold and lofty Babel's wreck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lyme-dog argent bears Sir Olivier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Couchant, and with the leash upon his neck:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The motto; TILL HE COMES: In gilded vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And worthy of himself he will be drest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Bold Brandimart designed upon the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of battle, for his royal father's sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his own honour, no device more gay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than a dim surcoat to the field to take.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By gentle Flordelice for that dark array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was wrought the fairest facing she could make.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With costly jewels was the border sown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sable the vest, and of one piece alone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>With her own hand the lady wrought that vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Becoming well the finest plate and chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein the valiant warrior should be drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cloak his courser's croup and chest and mane:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, from that day when she herself addrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unto this task, till ended was her pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She showed no sign of gladness; nor this while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor after, was she ever seen to smile.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The heartfelt fear, the torment evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of losing Brandimart the dame pursued.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She him whilere a hundred times and more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Engaged in fierce and fearful fight had viewed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever suchlike terror heretofore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had blanched her cheek and froze her youthful blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this new sense of fear increased her trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made the trembling lady's heart beat double.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The warriors to the wind their canvas rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When point device the three accoutred are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bold Sansonet is left, with England's peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Intrusted with the faithful army's care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flordelice, pricked at heart with cruel fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Filling the heavens with vow, lament and prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As far as they by sight can followed be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Follows their sails upon the foaming sea.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Scarce, with much labour, the two captains led</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her, gazing on the waters, from the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the palace drew, where on her bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They left the lady, grieved and trembling sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile upon their quest those others sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom mercy wind and weather seaward bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their vessel made that island on the right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The field appointed for so fell a fight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando disembarks, with his array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His kinsman Olivier and Brandimart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who on the side which fronts the eastern ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encamp them, and not haply without art.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Agramant arrives that very day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tents him on the contrary part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for the sun is sinking fast, forborne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is their encounter till the following morn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Until the skies the dawning light receive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed servants keep their watch both there and here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The valiant Brandimart resorts that eve</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thitherward, where their tents the paynims rear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And parleys, by this noble leader's leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Agramant; for they were friends whilere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, underneath the banner of the Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He into France had passed from Africk's shore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>After salutes, and joining hand with hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair reasons, as a friend, the faithful knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pressed on the leader of the paynim band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why he should not the appointed battle fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every town — restored to his command —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laying 'twixt Nile and Calpe's rocky height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vowed he, with Roland's license, should receive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If upon Mary's Son he would believe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>He said: "For loved you were, and are by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This counsel give I; that I deem it sane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since I pursue it, you assured must be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mahound I hold but as an idol vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Jesus Christ, the living God I see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to conduct you in my way were fain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I' the way of safety fain would have you move</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With me and all those others that I love.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>"In this consists your welfare; counsel none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save this, in your disaster, can avail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, of all counsels least, good Milo's son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To meet in combat, clad in plate and mail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that the profit, if the field be won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weighs not against the loss, in equal scale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If you be conqueror, little gain ensues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet little loss results not, if you lose.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Were good Orlando and we others slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Banded with him to conquer or to die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherefore, through this, ye should your lost domain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Acquire anew, forsooth, I see not, I;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor is there reason hope to entertain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, if we lifeless on the champaigne lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Men should be wanting in King Charles's host</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To guard in Africa his paltriest post."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>Thus Brandimart to Afick's cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And much would have subjoined; but, on his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That knight, with angry voice and haughty cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pagan interrupted, and replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">" `Tis sure temerity and madness sheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moves you and whatsoever wight beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That counsels matter, be it good or ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uncalled a counsellor's duty to fulfil;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And how to think, from love those counsels flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which once you bore and bear me, as you say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(To speak the very truth) I do not know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with Orlando see you here, this day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I ween that, knowing you are doomed to woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And marked for the devouring dragon's prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye all mankind would drag to nether hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In your eternity of pains to dwell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"If I shall win or lose, remount my throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or pass my future days in exile drear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God only knows, whose purpose is unknown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To me, in turn, or to Anglantes' peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Befall what may, by me shall nought be done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unworthy of a king, through shameful fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If death must be my certain portion, I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than wrong my princely blood, will die.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Ye may depart, who, save ye better play</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior, in to-morrow's listed fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then ye have plaid the embassador to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In arms will second ill Anglantes' knight."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agramant ended so his furious say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— His angry bosom boiling with despite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So said — the warriors parted, to repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till from the neighbouring sea the day arose.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>When the first whitening of the dawn was seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed, in a moment leapt on horseback all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Short parley past the puissant foes between.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There was no stop; there was no interval;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For they have laid in rest their lances keen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I into too foul a fault should fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meseems, my lord, if, while their deeds I tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I let Rogero perish in the swell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Cleaving the flood with nimble hands and feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He swims, amid the horrid surges' roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On him the threatening wind and tempest beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But him his harassed conscience vexes more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Christ's wrath he fears; and, since in waters sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(When time and fair occasion served of yore)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, in his folly, baptism little prized,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fears in these bitter waves to be baptized.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Those many promises remembered are</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereby he to his lady-love was tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those oaths which sworn to good Rinaldo were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And were in nought fulfilled upon his side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To God, in hope that he would hear and spare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he repented, oftentimes he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, should he land, and scape that mortal scaith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be a Christian, vowed in heart and faith;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And ne'er, in succour of the Moorish train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sword or lance, the faithful to offend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And into France, where he to Charlemagne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would render honour due, forthwith to wend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Bradamant with idle words again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To cheat, but bring his love to honest end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A miracle it is that, as he vows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He swims more lightly and his vigour grows.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>His vigour grows; unwearied is his mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still his arms from him the billow throw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This billow followed fast by that behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereof one lifts him high, one sinks him low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rising and falling, vext by wave and wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So gains the Child that shore with labour slow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where the rocky hill slopes seaward most,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All drenched and dropping, climbs the rugged coast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>All the others that had plunged into the flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the end, o'erwhelmed by those wild waters died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, as to Providence seemed good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mounted the solitary islet's side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When safe upon the barren rock he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A new alarm the stripling terrified;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be within those narrow bounds confined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And die, with hardship and with hunger pined.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet he with an unconquered heart, intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To suffer what the heavens for him ordained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O'er those hard stones, against that steep ascent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the top with feet intrepid strained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not a hundred yards had gone, when, bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With years, and with long fast and vigil stained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He worthy of much worship one espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In hermit's weed, descend the mountain's side;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Who cries, on his approaching him, "Saul, Saul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why persecutest thou my faithful seed?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As whilom said the Saviour to Saint Paul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When (blessed stroke!) he smote him from his steed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Thou thought'st to pass the sea, nor pay withal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thought'st to defraud the pilot of his meed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou seest that God has arms to reach and smite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When farthest off thou deem'st that God of might."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And he, that holiest anchoret, pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom the night foregoing God did send</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A vision, as he slumbered, and foreshewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How, thither by his aid the Child should wend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein his past and future life, reviewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were seen, as well as his unhappy end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sons, and grandsons, and his every heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fully revealed to that good hermit were.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>That anchoret pursues, and does upbraid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero first, and comforts finally:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upbraideth him, because he had delaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath that easy yoke to bend the knee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what he should have done, when whilom prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And called of Christ — then uncompelled and free —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had done with little grace; nor turned to God</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he saw him threatening with the rod.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Then comforts him — that Christ aye heaven allows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To them, that late or early heaven desire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all those labourers of the Gospel shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Paid by the vineyard's lord with equal hire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With charity and warm devotion glows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him instructs the venerable sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As toward the rocky cell where he resides</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with weak steps and slow Rogero guides.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Above that hallowed cell, on the hill's brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A little church receives the rising day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Commodious is the fane and fair enow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence to the beach descends a thicket gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where fertile and fruit-bearing palm-trees blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Myrtle, and lowly juniper, and bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Evermore threaded by a limpid fountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which falls with ceaseless murmur from the mountain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>'Twas well nigh forty years, since on that stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The goodly friar had fixed his quiet seat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, there to live a holy life, alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him the Saviour chose, as harbourage meet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pure water was his drink, and, plucked from one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or the other plant, wild berries were his meat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hearty and robust, of ailments clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The holy man had reached his eightieth year.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>That hermit lit a fire, and heaped the board</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With different fruits, within his small repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith the Child somedeal his strength restored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he had dried his clothes and dripping hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After, at better ease, to him God's word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mysteries of our faith expounded were;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the day following, in his fountain clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That anchoret baptized the cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>There dwells the young Rogero, well content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With what the rugged sojourn does allow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that the friar showed shortly his intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To send him where he fain would turn his prow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile with him he many an argument</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Handles and often; of God's kingdom now;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now of things appertaining to his case;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now to Rogero's blood, a future race.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The Lord, that every thing doth see and hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had to that holiest anchoret bewrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How he should not exceed the seventh year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dating from when he was a Christian made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who for the death of Pinabel whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(His lady's deed, but on Rogero laid)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well as Bertolagi's, should be slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By false Maganza's ill and impious train;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>And, how that treason should be smothered so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No sign thereof should outwardly appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For where that evil people dealt the blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They should entomb the youthful cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this should vengeance follow, albeit slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dealt by his consort and his sister dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how he by his wife should long be sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With weary womb, with heavy burden fraught,</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>'Twixt Brenta and Athesis, beneath those hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Which erst the good Antenor so contented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With their sulphureous veins and liquid rills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mead, and field, with furrows glad indented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he for these left pools which Xanthus fills;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Ida, and Ascanius long lamented,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till she a child should in the forests bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which little distant from Ateste are;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And how the Child, in might and beauty grown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, like his sire, Rogero shall be hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those Trojans, as of Trojan lineage known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall for their lord elect with solemn rite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who next by Charles (in succour of whose crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the Lombards shall the stripling fight)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that fair land dominion shall obtain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the honoured title of a marquis gain;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>And because Charles shall say in Latin `Este',</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(That is — be lords of the dominion round!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Entitled in a future season Este</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall with good omen be that beauteous ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus its ancient title of Ateste</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall of its two first letters lose the sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God also to his servant had foresaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vengeance taken for Rogero's dead;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Who shall, in vision, to his consort true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appear somedeal before the dawn of day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shall relate how him the traitor slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where his body lies to her shall say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She and Marphisa hence, those valiant two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With fire and sword on earth shall Poictiers lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor shall his son, when of befitting age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less harm Maganza in his mighty rage.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>On Azos, Alberts, Obysons, did dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hermit hoar, and on their offspring bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Borso, Nicholas, and Leonel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alphonso, Hercules, and Hippolyte,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And. last of those, the gentle Isabel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then curbs his tongue and will no more recite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to Rogero what is fit reveals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what is fitting to conceal, conceals.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile Orlando and bold Brandimart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that good knight, the Marquis Olivier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the paynim Mars together start;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Name well befitting Sericana's peer)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the other two — that from the adverse part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At more than a foot-pace their coursers steer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say King Agramant and King Sobrine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pebbly beach resounds, and rolling brine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>When they encounter in mid field, pell-mell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the sky flew every shivered lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At that loud noise, the sea was seen to swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At that loud noise, which echoed even to France.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso and Roland met as it befel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fairly balanced might appear the chance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for the vantage of Rinaldo's horse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which made Gradasso seem of greater force.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Baiardo shocked the steed of lesser might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Backed by Orlando, with such might and main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He made that courser stagger, left and right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And measure next his length upon the plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vainly to raise him strove Anglantes' knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thrice, nay four times, with rowels and with rein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Balked of his end, he lights upon the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Draws Balisarda, and uplifts his shield.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>With Agramant encounters Olivier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, fitly matched, their foaming coursers gall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bold Brandimart unhorsed in the career</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobrino; but it was not plain withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If 'twas the fault of horse or cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For seldom good Sobrino used to fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was it his courser's or his own misdeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobrino found himself without a steed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Now Brandimart, that upon earth descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king Sobrine, assailed no more his man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But at Gradasso, who Anglantes' pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had equally unhorsed, in fury ran.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On Agramant and Oliviero's side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile the warfare stood as it began:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When broken on their bucklers were the spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With swords encountered the returning peers.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Roland who saw Gradasso in such guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As showed that to return he little cared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Nor can return; so Brandimart aye plies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And presses Sericana's monarch hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turns round, and, like himself, afoot descries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobrino, in the doubtful strife unpaired:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At him he sprang; and, at his haughty look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaven, as the warrior trod, in terror shook.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Foreseeing the assault with wary eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prepared, and at close ward, behold the Moor!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As pilot against whom, now cresting nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The threatening billow comes with hollow roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards it turns his prow, and, when so high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He views the sea, would gladly be ashore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobrino rears his buckler, to withstand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The furious fall of Falerina's brand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Of such fine steel was Balisarda's blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That arms against it little shelter were;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by a person of such puissance swayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Roland, singe in the world or rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It splits the shield, and is in nowise stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though bound about with steel the edges are:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It splits the shield, and to the bottom rends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the shoulder underneath descends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Upon the shoulder; nor, though twisted chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And double plates encase the paynim foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These hinder much that sword of stubborn grain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From opening wide the parted flesh below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobrino at Orlando smites; but vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the valiant count is every blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom, for special grace, the King of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A body charmed against all arms had given.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The valorous count, redoubling still his blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thought from the trunk the monarch's head to smite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobrino, who the strength of Clermont knows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how the shield ill boots, retired from fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet not so far, but that upon his brows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell the dread faulchion of Anglantes' knight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twas on its flat, but such his might and main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It crushed the helm and stupefied the brain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Stunned by that furious stroke, he pressed the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And it was long ere he again did rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paladin believes the warfare o'er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that deprived of life Sobrino lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, lest Gradasso to ill pass and sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should bring Sir Brandimart, at him he flies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him the paynim overmatched in horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In arms and faulchion, and perhaps in force.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Bold Brandimart, who guides Frontino's rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The goodly courser, erst Rogero's steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So well contends with him of Sericane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king yet little seems his foe to exceed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, if he had as tempered plate and chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that bold paynim lord, would better speed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But (for he felt himself ill-armed) the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Often gave ground, and traversed left and right.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Better than good Frontino horse is none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To obey upon a sign the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twould seem that courser had the sense to shun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sharp Durindana's fall, now there now here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile elsewhere is horrid battle done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By royal Agramant and Olivier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who may be deemed well matched in warlike sleight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor champions differing much in martial might.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando had left Sobrino (as I said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On earth, and against Sericana's pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desirous valiant Brandimart to aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even as he was, afoot, in fury hied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, prompt to assail Gradasso with the blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, loose and walking in mid field, espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The goodly horse, which had Sobrino thrown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bowned him straight to make the steed his own.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>He seized the horse (for none the deed gainsaid)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And took a leap, and vaulted on his prize.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This hand the bridle grasped, and that the blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando's motions good Gradasso spies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor at his coming is the king dismaid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who by his name the paladin defies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him, and both his partners in the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hopes to make it dark before 'tis night.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Leaving his foe, he, facing Brava's lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thrust at the collar of his shirt of mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All else beside the flesh the faulchion bored;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To pierce through which would every labour fail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the same time descends Orlando's sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Where Balisarda bites no spells avail)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shears helmet, cuirass, shield, and all below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cleaves whate'er it rakes with headlong blow;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And in face, bosom, and in thigh it seamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath his mail, the king of Sericane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From whom his blood till how had never streamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since he that armour wore; new rage and pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thereat the warrior felt, and strange it seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sword cut so now, nor yet was Durindane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had Roland struck more home, or nearer been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From head to belly he had cleft him clean.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>No more in arms can trust the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As heretofore; for proved those arms have been:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with more care, more caution than whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prepares to parry with the faulchion keen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When entered Brandimart sees Brava's peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who snatched that battle from him, he between</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those other conflicts placed himself, that where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It most was needed, he might succour bear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>While so the fight is balanced 'mid those foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobrino, that on earth long time had lain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When to himself he was returned, uprose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In face and shoulder suffering grievous pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He lifts his face, his eyes about him throws;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thither, where more distant on the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sees his leader, with long paces steers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So stealthily, that none his coming hears;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>He on the Marquis came, who had but eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Agramant, and in the warrior's rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wounded upon the hocks in such fierce wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The courser of unheeding Olivier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he falls headlong; and beneath him lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His valiant master, nor his foot can clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His left foot, which in that unthought for woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was in the stirrup jammed, his steed below.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Sorbine pursued, and with back-handed blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thought he his head should from his neck have shorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But this forbids that armour, bright of show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Vulcan hammered, and by Hector worn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brandimart sees his risque, and at the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is by his steed, with flowing bridle, borne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobrino on the head he smote and flung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But straight from earth that fierce old man upsprung;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And turned anew to Olivier, to speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior's soul more promptly on its way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or at the least that baron to impede.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him beneath his courser keep at bay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bold Olivier, whose better arm was freed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with his sword could fend him as he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile so smites and longes, there and here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That at sword's length he holds the ancient peer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>He hopes, if him but little he withstood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He shall be straight delivered from that pain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sees him wholly strained and wet with blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that he spills so much from open vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twould seem he speedily must be subdued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So weak he hardly can himself sustain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Often and oft to rise the Marquis strove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet could not from beneath his courser move.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>Brandimart has found out the royal Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And storms about that paynim cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon Frontino, like a lathe, before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside, or whirling in the warrior's rear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A goodly horse the Christian champion bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor worse the southern king's in the career:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Brigliador, Rogero's gift he crost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile, by haughty Mandricardo lost.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>Great vantage has he, on another part:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of proof and perfect is his iron weed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His at a venture took Sir Brandimart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he could have in haste in suchlike need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But hopes (his anger puts him so in heart)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To change it for a better coat with speech;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit the Moorish king, with bitter blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has made the blood from his right should flow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Him in the flank Gradasso too had gored;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Nor this was laughing matter) so had scanned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His vantage that redoubted paynim lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He found a place wherein to plant his brand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He broke the warrior's shield, his left arm bored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And touched him slightly in the better hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But this was play, was pastime (might be said),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Roland's and Gradasso's battle weighed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Gradasso has Orlando half disarmed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Atop and on both sides his helm has broke:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fallen is his shield, his cuirass split; but harmed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior is not by the furious stroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which opened plate and mail; for he is charmed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And worser vengeance on the king has wroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In face, throat, breast has gored that cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside the wounds whereof I spake whilere.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>Gradasso, desperate when he descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself all wet, and smeared with sanguine dye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Roland, all from head to foot espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After such mighty strokes unstained and dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thinking head, breast, and belly to divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With both his hands upheaved his sword on high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, even as he devised, upon the front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote with mid blade Anglantes' haughty count.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And would by any other so have done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Would to the saddle-tree have cleft him clean:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the good sword, as if it fell upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its flat, rebounds again, unstained and sheen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The furious stroke astounded Milo's son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom some scattered stars on earth were seen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He drops the bridle and would drop the brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that a chain secures it to his hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>So by the noise was scared the horse that bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his back Anglantes' cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The courser scowered about the powdery shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Showing how good his speed in the career:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The County by that stroke astounded sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has not the power the frightened horse to steer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso follows and will reach him, so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he but little more pursues the foe;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But turning round, beholds the royal Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the utmost peril in that battle brought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For by the shining helmet which he wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the left hand, him Brandimart had caught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already had unlaced the casque before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with his dagger would new ill have wrought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor much defence could make the Moorish lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Brandimart as well had reft his sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Gradasso turned, nor more Orlando sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But hastened where he Agramant espied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The incautious Brandimart, suspecting nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando would have let him turn aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had not Gradasso in his eyes or thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the paynim's throat his knife applied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso came, and at his helmet layed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wielding with either hand his trenchant blade.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>Father of heaven! 'mid spirits chosen by thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him thy martyr true, a place accord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, having traversed his tempestuous sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now furls his sails in port. Ah! ruthless sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So cruel, Durindana, can'st thou be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To good Orlando, to thine ancient lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou can'st slaughter, in the warrior's view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all his friends the dearest and most true?</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>An iron ring that girt his helmet round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two inches thick, was broke by that fell blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cleft; and with the solid iron bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was parted the good cap of steel below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bold Brandimart, reversed upon the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With haggard face beside his horse lies low;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And issuing widely from the warrior's head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A stream of life-blood dyes the shingle red.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>Come to himself, the County turns his eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sees his Brandimart upon the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in such act Gradasso standing by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As clearly shows by whom the knight was slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he most raged or grieved I know not, I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But such short time is left him to complain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His hasty wrath breaks forth, his grief gives way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now 'tis time that I suspend my lay.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
