<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-23" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>CANTO 23</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Astolpho soars in air. Upon account</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Pinnabel is prisoned Scotland's heir:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Roland freed, Frontino Rodomont</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Takes from Hippalca, trusted to her care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Mandricardo strives Anglantes' count:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, next, offended by his lady fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the fury falls, so strange and fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in the world has not a parallel.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Let each assist the other in his need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seldom good actions go without their due;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if their just reward should not succeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At least, nor death, nor shame, nor loss ensue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who wrongs another, the remembered meed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well shall have, and soon or later rue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That mountains never meet, but that men may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oft encounter, is an ancient say.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Now mark what chanced to Pinnabel, the event</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of having borne himself so wickedly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He at the last received due punishment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Due and deserved by his iniquity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And God, who for the most is ill content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see the righteous suffer wrongfully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Secured the maid from harm, and will secure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All who from every wickedness are pure.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>Pinnabel deemed he to an end had brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And buried deep in earth, the martial maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor weening to behold her more, less thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her his treason's forfeit to have paid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor profits it the wily traitor ought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be among the forts his father swayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Altaripa here its summit rears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid rude hills, confining on Poictiers.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>Anselm in Altaripa held command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The count from whom was sprung this evil seed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, to escape from angry Clermont's hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of friends and of assistance stood in need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At a hill's foot, with her avenging brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant made the worthless traitor bleed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who found no better succour in the strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than piteous cry and fruitless prayer for life.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>When she has put to death the treacherous peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to put her to death had erst intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek Rogero she again would steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that her cruel fate would not consent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, where the wood was loneliest and most drear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wander by close path the lady sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until the western sun withdrew his light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abandoning the world above to night.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor knowing where for shelter she should rove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant in that place resolves to stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Couched on the verdant herbage of the grove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, sleeping, now awaits the dawn of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now watching Saturn, Venus, Mars, and Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the other wandering gods upon their way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, whether waking or to sleep resigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has aye Rogero present to her mind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>With sorrow and repentance oft assailed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She from her inmost heart profoundly sighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Anger over Love should have prevailed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Anger has torn me from my love," (she cried,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Oh! had I made some note, which had availed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, whence I set out, my steps to guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When I departed on my ill emprize!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sure I was lorn of memory and of eyes!"</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>These words and others she in mournful strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Utters, and broods within her heart on more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile a wind of sighs, and plenteous rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of tears, are tokens of her anguish sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the east, at last, expected long in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wished for twilight streaked the horizon o'er;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she her courser took, which on the ley</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was feeding, and rode forth to meet the day.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor far had rode, ere from the greenwood-trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She issued, where the dome was erst displayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many days her with such witcheries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The evil-minded wizard had delayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here she Astolpho found, who at full ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A bridle for the Hippogryph had made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here was standing, thoughtful and in pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom he should deliver Rabicane.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>By chance she found him, as the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had from the helm uncased his head to view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that when of the dingy forest clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair Bradamant her gentle cousin knew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him from afar she hailed with joyful cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now more nigh, to embrace the warrior flew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And named herself, and raised her vizor high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let him plainly who she was espy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>None could Astolpho have found any where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With whom to leave his horse with more content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As knowing she would guard the steed with care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to his lord on his return present;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he believed that Heaven had, in its care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Duke Aymon's daughter for this pleasure sent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her was he wont with pleasure aye to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now with more in his necessity.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>Embracing twice or thrice the cousins stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fraternally, each other's neck, and they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had of each other's welfare made demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With much affection, ere the duke 'gan say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Would I now see the winged people's land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here upon earth I make too long delay."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And opening to the dame the thought he brewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her the flying horse Astolpho shewed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But she scarce marvelled when above the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She saw the rising steed his wings unfold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since upon former time, with mastering rein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On him had charged the dame that wizard old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made her eye and eyelid sorely strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So hard she gazed, his movements to behold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The day that he bore off, with wonderous range,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero on his journey, long and strange.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Astolpho says on her he will bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His Rabican; so passing swift of kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, if the courser started when a bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was drawn, he left the feathered shaft behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And will as well his panoply forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it may to Mount Alban be consigned:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she for him preserve the martial weed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since of his arms he has no present need.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>Bent, since a course in air was to be flown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he, as best he can, will make him light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet keeps the sword and horn; although alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The horn from every risque might shield the knight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he the lance abandons, which the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Galaphron was wont to bear in flight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lance, by which whoever in the course</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was touched, fell headlong hurtling from his horse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Backed by Astolpho, and ascending slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hippogryph through yielding aether flew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next the rider stirred the courser so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in a thought he vanished out of view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus with his pilot does the patron go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fearing the gale and rock, till he is through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The reefs; then, having left the shore behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoists every sail, and shoots before the wind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Bradamant, when departed was the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remained distressed in mind; since in what way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She knew not her good kinsman's warlike gear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And courser to Mount Alban to convey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For on her heart, which they inflame and tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warm desire and greedy will yet prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see the Child; whom she to find once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At Vallombrosa thought, if not before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Here standing in suspense, by chance she spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A churl, that came towards her on the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, at her best, Astolpho's armour tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As best he might, and laid on Rabicane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She next behind her bade the peasant guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(One courser loaded and one loose) the twain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two were the steeds; for she had that before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On which his horse from Pinnabel she bore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>To Vallombrosa to direct her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She thought, in hopes to find Rogero there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, fearing evermore to go astray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knew not how thither she might best repair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The churl had of the country small assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, sure to be bewildered, wend the pair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet at a venture thitherward she hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where she believes the place of meeting lies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>She here and there, as she her way pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turned, but found none to question of the road;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She saw at mid-day, issuing from the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fort, nor far removed was the abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which on the summit of a mountain stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the lady like Mount Alban showed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was Mount Alban sure; in which repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One of her brothers and her mother were.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>She, when she recognized the place, became</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sadder at heart than I have power to say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If she delays, discovered is the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor thence will be allowed to wend her way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thence she wends not, of the amorous flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which so consumes her, she will be the prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor see Rogero more, nor compass aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which was at Vallombrosa to be wrought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Some deal she doubted: then to turn her steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolved upon Mount Alban's castle near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for she thence her way could deftly read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her course anew towards the abbey steer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Fortune, good or evil, had decreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The maid, before she of the vale was clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of one of her good brethren should be spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alardo named, ere she had time to hide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He came from billeting the bands which lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dispersed about that province, foot and horse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the surrounding district, to obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Charlemagne, had raised another force.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embraces brotherly and friendly say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Salutes and kindly cheer, ensue of course;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next into Mount Alban, side by side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They, communing of many matters, ride.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Bradamant enters Montalbano's seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom Beatrice had mourned, and vainly sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through spacious France: 'Tis here all welcome sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The kiss and clasp of hand, she holds at nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While her a mother and a brother greet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As the enamoured maid compares in thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These with the loved Rogero's fond embrace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which time will never from her mind efface.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Because she could not go, one in her stead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To send to Vallombrosa she devised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thither in the damsel's name should speed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom should young Rogero be apprised</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What kept her thence; and prayed, if prayer should need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That there he for love would be baptised;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next, as was concerned, would intend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What might their bridal bring to happy end.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>She purposed the same messenger should bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well to her Rogero his good steed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he was ever wonted to hold dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthily dear; for sure so stout at need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And beauteous was no courser, far or near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In land of Christian or of Paynim creed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In occupation of the Gaul or Moor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Except Baiardo good and Brigliador.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Valiant Rogero, when too bold of sprite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He backed the hippogryph and soared in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Frontino left (Frontino he was hight),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom Bradamant then took into her care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to Mount Alban sent; and had him dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And nourished, at large cost, with plenteous fare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor let be rode except at easy pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence was he ne'er so sleek or well in case.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Each damsel and each dame who her obeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She tasked, together with herself, to sew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With subtle toil; and with fine gold o'erlaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A piece of silk of white and sable hue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this she trapt the horse; then chose a maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Old Callitrephia's daughter, from the crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose mother whilom Bradamant had nursed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A damsel she in all her secrets versed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>How graven in her heart Rogero lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand times to her she had confessed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had extolled above the deities</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The manners, worth, and beauty be possessed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"No better messenger could I devise,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(She said, and called the damsel from the rest,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Nor have I one, Hippalca mine, more sage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sure than three, to do my embassage."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Hippalca was the attendant damsel hight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Go," (says her lady, and describes the way)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And afterwards informs the maid aright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all which to Rogero she should say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And why she at the abbey failed the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who must not to bad faith ascribe her stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But this to Fortune charge, that so decides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, more than we ourselves, our conduct guides.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>She made the damsel mount upon a pad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And put into her hand Frontino's rein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if she met with one so rude or mad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to deprive her of the steed were fain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her to proclaim who was his owner, bade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As that which might suffice to make him sane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For she believed there was no cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that Rogero's name would make him fear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Of many and many things, whereof to treat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With good Rogero, in her stead, she showed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of which instructed well, her palfrey fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hippalca stirred, nor longer there abode.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through highway, field, and wood, a gloomy beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than ten weary miles the damsel rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere any crossed her path on mischief bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or even questioned witherward she went.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>At noon of day, descending from a mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She in a streight and ill declivity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Led by a dwarf, encountered Rodomont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was afoot and harnessed cap-a-pee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moor towards her raised his haughty front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And straight blasphemed the eternal Hierarchy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That horse, so richly trapped and passing fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had not found in a knight-errant's care.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>On the first courser he should find, the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had sworn a solemn oath his hands to lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This was the first, nor he on steed could light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fairer or fitter; yet to take away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The charger from a maid were foul despite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doubtful he stands, but covets sore the prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eyes and surveys him, and says often, "Why</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is not as well the courser's master by?"</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Ah! would be were!" to him the maid replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"For haply he would make thee change thy thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A better knight than thee the horse doth ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vainly would his match on earth be sought."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— "Who tramples thus on other's fame?" — he cried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she — "Rogero" — said, as she was taught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then Rodomont — "The steed I may my own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since him a champion rides of such renown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"If he, as you relate, be of such force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he surprises all beside in might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I needs must pay the hire as well as horse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be this at the pleasure of the knight!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I am Rodomont, to him discourse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if indeed with me he lists to fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me shall to find; in that I shine confest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By my own light, in motion or at rest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"I leave such vestige wheresoe'er I tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The volleyed thunder leaves not worse below."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had thrown back, over Frontino's head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The courser's gilded reins, in saying so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Backed him, and left Hippalca sore bested;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, bathed in tears, and goaded by her woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cries shame on him, and threats the king with ill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont hearkens not, and climbs the hill:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Whither the dwarf conducts him on the trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Doralice and Mandricardo bold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behind, Hippalca him in ceaseless chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursues with taunt and curses manifold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What came of this is said in other place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turpin, by whom this history is told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here makes digression, and returns again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, where faithless Pinnabel was slain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Duke Aymon's daughter scarce had turned away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From thence, who on her track in haste had gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere thither by another path, astray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino came, with that deceitful crone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw the bleeding body where it lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, though the warrior was to him unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As good and courteous, felt his bosom swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With pity at that cruel sight and fell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>Dead lay Sir Pinnabel, and bathed in gore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From whom such streams of blood profusely flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As were a cause for wonderment, had more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swords than a hundred joined to lay him low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A print of recent footsteps to explore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavalier of Scotland was not slow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who took the adventure, in the hope to read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was the doer of the murderous deed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>The hag to wait was ordered by the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would return to her in little space.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She to the body of the count drew near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with fixt eye examined every place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who willed not aught, that in her sight was dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The body of the dead should vainly grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As one who, soiled with every other vice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surpassed all womankind in avarice.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>If she in any manner could have thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or hoped to have concealed the intended theft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bleeding warrior's surcoat, richly wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She would, together with his arms, have reft;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But at what might be safely hidden, caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, grieved at heart, forewent the glorious weft.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him of a beauteous girdle she undrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this secured between a double vest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Zerbino after some short space came back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who vainly Bradamant had thence pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the green holt; because the beaten track</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was lost in many others in the wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he (for daylight now began to lack)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feared night should catch him 'mid those mountains rude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the impious woman thence, in quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of inn, from the disastrous valley prest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>A spacious town, which Altaripa hight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Journeying the twain, at two miles' distance spy:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There stopt the pair, and halted for the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, at full soar, even now went up the sky:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor long had rested there ere, left and right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They from the people heard a mournful cry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw fast tears from every eyelid fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if some cause of sorrow touched them all.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>Zerbino asked the occasion, and 'twas said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tidings had been to Count Anselmo brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Pinnabel, his son, was lying dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a streight way between two mountains wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino feigned surprise, and hung his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fear lest he the assassin should be thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But well divined this was the wight he found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his journey, lifeless on the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>After some little time, the funeral bier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrives, 'mid torch and flambeau, where the cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are yet more thick, and to the starry sphere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lament and noise of smitten hands arise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And faster and from fuller vein the tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waters all cheeks, descending from the eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But in a cloud more dismal than the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is the unhappy father's visage drest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>While solemn preparation so was made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the grand obsequies, with reverence due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">According to old use and honours paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In former age, corrupted by each new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A proclamation of their lord allayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quickly the noise of the lamenting crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Promising any one a mighty gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That should denounce by whom his son was slain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>From voice to voice, from one to other ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The loud proclaim they through the town declare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till this the wicked woman chanced to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who past in rage the tyger or the bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence the ruin of the Scottish peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Either in hatred, would the crone prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or were it she alone might boast to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In human form, without humanity;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Or were it but to gain the promised prize; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She to seek out the grieving county flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, prefacing her tale in likely wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Said that Zerbino did the deed; and drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The girdle forth, to witness to her lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which straight the miserable father knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the woman's tale and token built</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A clear assurance of Zerbino's guilt.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>And, weeping, with raised hands, was heard to say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He for his murdered son would have amends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To block the hostel where Zerbino lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all the town is risen, the father sends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prince, who deems his enemies away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And no such injury as this attends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his first sleep is seized by Anselm's throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thinks he has endured so foul a wrong.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>That night in prison, fettered with a pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of heavy letters, is Zerbino chained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For before yet the skies illuminated are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wrongful execution is ordained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the place will he be quartered, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The deed was done for which he is arraigned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No other inquest is on this received;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It is enough that so their lord believed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>When, the next morn, Aurora stains with dye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Red, white, and yellow, the clear horizon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The people rise, to punish ("Death!" their cry)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino for the crime he has not done:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They without order him accompany,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lawless multitude, some ride, some run.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I' the midst the Scottish prince, with drooping head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is, bound upon a little hackney, led.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But HE who with the innocent oft sides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor those abandons who make him their stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For prince Zerbino such defence provides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is no fear that he will die to-day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God thitherward renowned Orlando guides;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose coming for his safety paves the way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando sees beneath him on a plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youth to death conducted by the train.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>With him was wended she, that in the cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prisoned, Orlando found; that royal maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Child of Gallicia's king, fair Isabel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom chance into the ruffians' power conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time her ship she quitted, by the swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the wild sea and tempest overlaid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel, who, yet nearer her heart-core</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than her own vital being, Zerbino wore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>She had beneath Orlando's convoy strayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since rescued from the cave. When on the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel saw the motley troop arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She asked Orlando what might be the train?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"I know not," said the Count; and left the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the height, and hurried towards the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He marked Zerbino, and at the first sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A baron of high worth esteemed the knight,</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And asked him why and wherefore him they led</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus captive, to Zerbino drawing near:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At this the doleful prince upraised his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, having better heard the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rehearsed the truth; and this so well he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he deserved the succour of the peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well Sir Orlando him, by his reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deemed innocent, and wrongly doomed to die.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>And, after he had heard 'twas at the hest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Anselm, Count of Altaripa, done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was certain 'twas and outrage manifest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since nought but ill could spring from him; and one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moreover, was the other's foe profest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From ancient hate and enmity, which run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Clermont and Maganza's blood; a feud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With injuries, and death and shame pursued.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando to the rabble cried, "Untie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavalier, unless you would be slain."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— "Who deals such mighty blows?" — one made reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That would be thought the truest of the train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Were he of fire who makes such bold defy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We wax or straw, too haughty were the strain":</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And charged with that the paladin of France.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando at the losel couched his lance.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The shining armour which the chief had rent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From young Zerbino but the night before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And clothed himself withal, poor succour lent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against Orlando in that combat sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the churl's right cheek the weapon went:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It failed indeed his tempered helm to bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But such a shock he suffered in the strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As broke his neck, and stretched him void of life.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>All at one course, of other of the band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With lance unmoved, he pierced the bosom through;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left it; on Durindana laid his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And broke into the thicket of the crew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One head in twain he severed with the brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(While, from the shoulders lopt, another flew)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of many pierced the throat; and in a breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above a hundred broke and put to death.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Above a third he killed, and chased the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And smote, and pierced, and cleft, as he pursued.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself of helm or shield one dispossest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One with spontoon or bill the champaign strewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This one along the road, across it prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fourth; this squats in cavern or in wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando, without pity, on that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lets none escape whom he has power to slay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Of a hundred men and twenty, in that crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So Turpin sums them) eighty died at least.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither Orlando finally withdrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, with a heart sore trembling in his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino sat; how he at Roland's view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rejoiced, in verse can hardly be exprest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, but that he was on the hackney bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would at his feet have cast himself to ground.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>While Roland, after he had loosed the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Helped him to don his shining arms again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stript from those serjeants' captain, who had dight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself with the good harness, to his pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prince on Isabella turned his sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had halted on the hill above the plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, after she perceived the strife was o'er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nearer the field of fight her beauties bore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>When young Zerbino at his side surveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady, who by him was held so dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauteous lady, whom false tongue had said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was drowned, so often wept with many a tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if ice at his heart-core had been laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waxed cold, and some deal shook the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the chill quickly past, and he, instead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was flushed with amorous fire, from foot to head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>From quickly clipping her in his embrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him reverence for Anglantes' sovereign stayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he thought, and held for certain case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Roland was a lover of the maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So past from pain to pain; and little space</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Endured the joy which he at first assayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And worse he bore she should another's be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than hearing that the maid was drowned at sea.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>And worse he grieved, that she was with a knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom he owed so much: because to wrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady from his hand, was neither right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet perhaps would prove an easy quest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, without quarrel, had no other wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suffered to part, of such a prize possest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But would endure, Orlando (such his debt)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A foot upon his prostrate neck should set.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The three in silence journey to a font,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where they alight, and halt beside the well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His helmet here undid the weary Count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made the prince too quit the iron shell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youth unhelmed, she sees her lover's front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pale with sudden joy grows Isabel:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, changing, brightened like a humid flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the warm sun succeeds to drenching shower.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And without more delay or scruple, prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To cast her arms about her lover dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not a word could draw-forth from her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But bathed his neck and face with briny tear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando, who remarked the love exprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Needing no more to make the matter clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could not but, by these certain tokens, see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The could no other but Zerbino be.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>When speech returned, ere yet the maiden well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had dried her cheeks from the descending tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She only of the courtesy could tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Late shown her by Anglantes' cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prince, who in one scale weighed Isabel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together with his life, esteemed as dear, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell at Orlando's feet and him adored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to two lives at once by him restored.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Proffers and thanks had followed, with a round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of courtesies between the warlike pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had they not heard the covered paths resound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which overgrown with gloomy foliage were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon their heads the helmet, late unbound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They quickly place, and to their steeds repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, lo! a knight and maid arrive, ere well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavaliers are seated in the sell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>This was the Tartar Mandricardo, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In haste behind the paladin had sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To venge Alzirdo and Manilard, the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom good Orlando's valour had laid dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though afterwards less eager to pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since he with him fair Doralice had led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom from a hundred men, in plate and chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, with a single staff of oak, had ta'en.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet knew not that it was Anglantes' peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while, of whom he had pursued the beat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though that he was a puissant cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By certain signals was he taught to weet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than Zerbino him he eyed, and, near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perused the paladin from head to feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then finding all the tokens coincide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Thou art the man I seek," the paynim cried.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>" 'Tis now ten days," to him the Tartar said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"That thee I still have followed; so the fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had stung me, and in me such longing bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which of thee to our camp of Paris came:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, amid thousands by thy hand laid dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarce one alive fled thither, to proclaim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mighty havoc made by thy good hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Mid Tremisena's and Noritia's band.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"I was not, as I knew, in following slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both to behold thee, and to prove thy might;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the surcoat o'er thine arms I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Instructed of thy vest) thou art the knight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if such cognizance thou didst not show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, 'mid a hundred, wert concealed from sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For what thou art thou plainly wouldst appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy worth conspicuous in thy haughty cheer."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"No one can say," to him Orlando cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"But that a valiant cavalier thou art:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such a brave desire can ill reside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Tis my assurance, in a humble heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since thou wouldst see me, would that thou inside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Couldst as without, behold me! I apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will lay me helm, that in all points thy will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And purpose of thy quest I may fulfil.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"But when thou well hast scanned me with thine eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To that thine other wish as well attend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It yet remains for thee to satisfy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The want, which leads thee after me to wend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou mayest mark if, in my valour, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agree with that bold cheer thou so commend."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— "And now," (exclaimed the Tartar), "for the rest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For my first want is thoroughly redrest."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando, all this while, from head to feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Searches the paynim with inquiring eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both sides, and next the pommel of his seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surveys, yet neither mace nor tuck espies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And asks how he the combat will repeat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If his good lance at the encounter flies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— "Take thou no care for that," replied the peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Thus into many have I stricken fear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"I have an oath in Heaven to gird no blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till Durindana from the count be won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursuing whom, I through each road here strayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him to reckon for more posts than one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thou wilt please to hear, my oath I made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When on my head I placed this morion:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which casque, with all the other arms I bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand years ago great Hector's were.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"To these good arms nought lacks beside the sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How it was stolen, to you I cannot say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This now, it seems, is borne by Brava's lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence is he so daring in affray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet well I trust, if I the warrior board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make him render his ill-gotten prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet more; I seek the champion with desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To avenge the famous Agrican, my sire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Him this Orlando slew by treachery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I wot, nor could have slain in other wise."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The count could bear no more, and, " 'Tis a lie!"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Exclaims), "and whosoever says so, lies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him fairly did I slay; Orlando, I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But what thou seekest Fortune here supplies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this the faulchion is, which thou has sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which shall be thine if by thy valour bought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Although mine is the faulchion, rightfully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let us for it in courtesy contend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor will I in this battle, that it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More mine than thine, but to a tree suspend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bear off the weapon freely hence, if me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou kill or conquer." As he made an end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He Durindana from his belt unslung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in mid-field upon a sapling hung.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Already distant half the range of bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is from his opposite each puissant knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pricks against the other, nothing slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To slack the reins or ply the rowels bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already dealt is either mighty blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the helm yields a passage to the sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if of ice, the shattered lances fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Broke in a thousand pieces, to the sky.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>One and the other lance parforce must split,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that the cavaliers refuse to bend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cavaliers, who in the saddle sit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returning with the staff's unbroken end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warriors, who with steed had ever smit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, as a pair of hinds in rage contend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the mead's boundary or river's right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed with two clubs, maintain a cruel fight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The truncheons which the valiant champions bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fail in the combat, and few blows resist;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both rage with mightier fury, here and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left without other weapon than the fist;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this the desperate foes engage, and, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hand can grapple, plate and mail untwist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let none desire, to guard himself from wrongs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A heavier hammer or more holding tongs.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>How can the Saracen conclude the fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With honour, which he haughtily had sought?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twere forty to waste time in an assay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where to himself more harm the smiter wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than to the smitten: in conclusion, they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Closed, and the paynim king Orlando caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And strained against his bosom; what Jove's son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did by Antaeus, thinking to have done.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Him griped athwart, he, in impetuous mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would now push from him, now would closely strain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And waxed so wroth that, in his heat of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Tartar little thought about his rein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Firm in his stirrups self-collected stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roland, and watched his vantage to obtain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to the other courser's forehead slipt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His wary hand, and thence the bridle stript.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The Saracen assays with all his might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To choak, and from the sell his foeman tear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With either knee Orlando grasps it tight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can the Tartar more him, here or there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with the straining of the paynim knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The girts which hold his saddle broken are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scarce conscious of his fall, Orlando lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With feet i' the stirrups, tightening yet his thighs.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>As falls a sack of armour, with such sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tumbled Orlando, when he prest the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Mandricardo's courser, when he found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His head delivered from the guiding rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made off with him, unheeding what the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stumbling through woodland, or by pathway plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hither and tither, blinded by his fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bore with him the Tartar cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The beauteous Doralice, who sees her guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So quit the field, — dismayed at his retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wonted in his succour to confide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her hackney drives behind his courser fleet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim rates the charger, in his pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And smites him oftentimes with hands and feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threatening, as if he understood his lore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where he'd stop the courser, chafes him more.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>Not looking to his feet, by high or low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beast of craven kind, with headlong force</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Three miles in rings had gone, and more would go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that into a fosse which stopt their course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not lined with featherbed or quilt below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tumble, reversed, the rider and his horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the hard ground was Mandricardo thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet neither spoiled himself, nor broke a bone:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>Here stopt the horse; but him he could not guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left without bit his motions to restrain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brimfull of rage and choler, at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Tartar held him, grappled by the mane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Put upon him" (to Mandricardo cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His lady, Doralice) "my hackney's rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since for the bridle I have little use;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For gentle is my palfrey, reined or loose."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>The paynim deems it were discourtesy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To accept the proffer by the damsel made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But his through other means a rein will be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since Fortune, who his wishes well appaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made thitherward the false Gabrina flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After she young Zerbino had betrayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who like a she-wolf fled, which, as she hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At distance hears the hounds and hunters' cries.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She had upon her back the gallant gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the same youthful ornaments and vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stript from the ill-taught damsel for her jeer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in her spoils the beldam might be drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rode the horse that damsel backed whilere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was among the choicest and the best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere yet aware of her, the ancient dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On Doralice and Mandricardo came.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Stordilane's daughter and the Tartar king</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laugh at the vest of youthful show and shape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon that ancient woman, figuring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like monkey, rather say, like grandam ape.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From her the Saracen designs to wring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rein, and does the deed: upon the rape</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the crone's bridle, he, with angry cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threatens and scares her horse, and makes him fly.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>He flies and hurries through the forest gray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ancient woman, almost dead with fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By hill and dale, by straight and crooked way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By fosse and cliff, at hazard, there and here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But it imports me not so much to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of her, that I should leave Anglantes' peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, from annoyance of a foe released,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The broken saddle at his ease re-pieced.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>He mounts his horse, and watches long, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Departing, if the foe will re-appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor seeing puissant Mandricardo more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At last resolves in search of him to steer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, as one nurtured well in courtly lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From thence departed not the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he with kind salutes, in friendly strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair leaves had taken of the loving twain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>At his departure waxed Zerbino woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Isabella wept for sorrow: they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had wended with him, but the count, although</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their company was fair and good, said nay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Urging for reason, nought so ill could show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In cavalier, as, when upon his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek his foeman out, to take a friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who him with arms might succour or defend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Next, if they met the Saracen, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They should encounter him, besought them say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he, Orlando, would for three days more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waiting him, in that territory stay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, after that, would seek the flags which bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The golden lilies, and King Charles' array.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Mandricardo through their means might know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If such his pleasure, where to find his foe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The lovers promised willingly to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This, and whatever else he should command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By different ways the cavaliers withdrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One on the right, and one on the left hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The count, ere other path he would pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Took from the sapling, and replaced, his brand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, where he weened he might the paynim best</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encounter, thitherward his steed addrest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>The course in pathless woods, which, without rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Tartar's charger had pursued astray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made Roland for two days, with fruitless pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Follow him, without tidings of his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando reached a rill of crystal vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On either bank of which a meadow lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, stained with native hues and rich, he sees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dotted o'er with fair and many trees.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>The mid-day fervour made the shelter sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hardy herd as well as naked swain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that Orlando, well beneath the heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some deal might wince, opprest with plate and chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He entered, for repose, the cool retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And found it the abode of grief and pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And place of sojourn more accursed and fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On that unhappy day, than tongue can tell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>Turning him round, he there, on many a tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beheld engraved, upon the woody shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What as the writing of his deity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He knew, as soon as he had marked the lore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This was a place of those described by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither ofttimes, attended by Medore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the near shepherd's cot had wont to stray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauteous lady, sovereign of Catay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>In a hundred knots, amid those green abodes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a hundred parts, their cyphered names are dight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose many letters are so many goads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Love has in his bleeding hear-core pight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would discredit in a thousand modes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That which he credits in his own despite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would parforce persuade himself, that rhind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Other Angelica than his had signed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"And yet I know these characters," he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Of which I have so many read and seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By her may this Medoro be belied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And me, she, figured in the name, may mean."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feeding on such like phantasies, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The real truth, did sad Orlando lean</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the empty hope, though ill contented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he by self-illusions had fomented.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>But stirred and aye rekindled it, the more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he to quench the ill suspicion wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like the incautious bird, by fowler's lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hampered in net or line; which, in the thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To free its tangled pinions and to soar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By struggling, is but more securely caught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando passes thither, where a mountain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O'erhangs in guise of arch the crystal fountain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Splay-footed ivy, with its mantling spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gadding vine, the cavern's entry case;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where often in the hottest noon of day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pair had rested, locked in fond embrace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within the grotto, and without it, they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had oftener than in any other place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With charcoal or with chalk their names pourtrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or flourished with the knife's indenting blade.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Here from his horse the sorrowing County lit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And at the entrance of the grot surveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cloud of words, which seemed but newly writ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And which the young Medoro's hand had made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the great pleasure he had known in it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sentence he in verses had arrayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which in his tongue, I deem, might make pretence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To polished phrase; and such in ours the sense.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Gay plants, green herbage, rill of limpid vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, grateful with cool shade, thou gloomy cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where oft, by many wooed with fruitless pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beauteous Angelica, the child of grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Galaphron, within my arms has lain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the convenient harbourage you gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, poor Medoro, can but in my lays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As recompence, for ever sing your praise.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"And any loving lord devoutly pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Damsel and cavalier, and every one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom choice or fortune hither shall convey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stranger or native, — to this crystal run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shade, caverned rock, and grass, and plants, to say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Benignant be to you the fostering sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And moon, and may the choir of nymphs provide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That never swain his flock may hither guide!"</span>
			</p>
			<!--CX-->
			<p>
				<span>In Arabic was writ the blessing said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Known to Orlando like the Latin tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, versed in many languages, best read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was in this speech; which oftentimes from wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And injury, and shame, had saved his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time he roved the Saracens among.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But let him boast not of its former boot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O'erbalanced by the present bitter fruit.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Three times, and four, and six, the lines imprest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the stone that wretch perused, in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeking another sense than was exprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ever saw the thing more clear and plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the while, within his troubled breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He felt an icy hand his heart-core strain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With mind and eyes close fastened on the block,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length he stood, not differing from the rock.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Then well-nigh lost all feeling; so a prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wholly was he to that o'ermastering woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This is a pang, believe the experienced say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of him who speaks, which does all griefs outgo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His pride had from his forehead passed away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His chin had fallen upon his breast below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor found he, so grief barred each natural vent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moisture for tears, or utterance for lament.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Stiffed within, the impetuous sorrow stays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which would too quickly issue; so to abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Water is seen, imprisoned in the vase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose neck is narrow and whose swell is wide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time, when one turns up the inverted base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the mouth, so hastes the hurrying tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the streight encounters such a stop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It scarcely works a passage, drop by drop.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>He somewhat to himself returned, and thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How possibly the thing might be untrue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The some one (so he hoped, desired, and sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To think) his lady would with shame pursue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or with such weight of jealously had wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whelm his reason, as should him undo;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that he, whosoe'er the thing had planned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had counterfeited passing well her hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXV-->
			<p>
				<span>With such vain hope he sought himself to cheat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And manned some deal his spirits and awoke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then prest the faithful Brigliadoro's seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As on the sun's retreat his sister broke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor far the warrior had pursued his beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere eddying from a roof he saw the smoke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heard noise of dog and kine, a farm espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thitherward in quest of lodging hied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Languid, he lit, and left his Brigliador</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a discreet attendant: one undrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His limbs, one doffed the golden spurs he wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one bore off, to clean, his iron vest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This was the homestead where the young Medore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lay wounded, and was here supremely blest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando here, with other food unfed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having supt full of sorrow, sought his bed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The more the wretched sufferer seeks for ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He finds but so much more distress and pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who every where the loathed hand-writing sees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On wall, and door, and window: he would fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Question his host of this, but holds his peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because, in sooth, he dreads too clear, too plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make the thing, and this would rather shrowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it may less offend him, with a cloud.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Little availed the count his self-deceit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For there was one who spake of it unsought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sheperd-swain, who to allay the heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With which he saw his guest so troubled, thought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tale which he was wonted to repeat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Of the two lovers — to each listener taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A history which many loved to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He now, without reserve, 'gan tell the peer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>How at Angelica's persuasive prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to his farm had carried young Medore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grievously wounded with an arrow; where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In little space she healed the angry sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But while she exercised this pious care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love in her heart the lady wounded more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And kindled from small spark so fierce a fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She burnt all over, restless with desire:</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor thinking she of mightiest king was born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who ruled in the east, nor of her heritage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forced by too puissant love, had thought no scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be the consort of a poor foot-page.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— His story done, to them in proof was borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gem, which, in reward for harbourage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her extended in that kind abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica, at parting, had bestowed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>A deadly axe was this unhappy close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, at a single stroke, lopt off the head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, satiate with innumerable blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That cruel hangman Love his hate had fed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando studied to conceal his woes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet the mischief gathered force and spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would break out parforce in tears and sighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would he, or would be not, from mouth and eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>When he can give the rein to raging woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alone, by other's presence unreprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From his full eyes the tears descending flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a wide stream, and flood his troubled breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Mid sob and groan, he tosses to and fro</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About his weary bed, in search of rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vainly shifting, harder than a rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sharper than a nettle found its flock.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Amid the pressure of such cruel pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It past into the wretched sufferer's head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That oft the ungrateful lady must have lain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together with her leman, on that bed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor less he loathed the couch in his disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor from the down upstarted with less dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than churl, who, when about to close his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Springs from the turf, if he a serpent spies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>In him, forthwith, such deadly hatred breed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That bed, that house, that swain, he will not stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till the morn break, or till the dawn succeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose twilight goes before approaching day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In haste, Orlando takes his arms and steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the deepest greenwood wends his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, when assured that he is there alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gives utterance to his grief in shriek and groan.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Never from tears, never from sorrowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He paused; nor found he peace by night and day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fled from town, in forest harbouring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the open air on hard earth lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He marvelled at himself, how such a spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of water from his eyes could stream away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And breath was for so many sobs supplied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus ofttimes, amid his mourning, cried.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"These are no longer real tears which rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And which I scatter from so full a vein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of tears my ceaseless sorrow lacked supplies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They stopt when to mid-height scarce rose my pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vital moisture rushing to my eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Driven by the fire within me, now would gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A vent; and it is this which I expend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And which my sorrows and my life will end.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"No; these, which are the index of my woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These are not sighs, nor sighs are such; they fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At times, and have their season of repose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I feel, my breast can never less exhale</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its sorrow: Love, who with his pinions blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fire about my heart, creates this gale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love, by what miracle does thou contrive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It wastes not in the fire thou keep'st alive?</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"I am not — am not what I seem to sight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What Roland was is dead and under ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slain by that most ungrateful lady's spite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose faithlessness inflicted such a wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Divided from the flesh, I am his sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which in this hell, tormented, walks its round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be, but in its shadow left above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A warning to all such as thrust in love."</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>All night about the forest roved the count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, at the break of daily light, was brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By his unhappy fortune to the fount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where his inscription young Medoro wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see his wrongs inscribed upon that mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflamed his fury so, in him was nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But turned to hatred, phrensy, rage, and spite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor paused he more, but bared his faulchion bright;</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Cleft through the writing; and the solid block,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the sky, in tiny fragments sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wo worth each sapling and the caverned rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Medore and Angelica were read!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So scathed, that they to shepherd or to flock</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thenceforth shall never furnish shade or bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that sweet fountain, late so clear and pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From such tempestuous wrath was ill secure.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>For he turf, stone, and trunk, and shoot, and lop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast without cease into the beauteous source;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till, turbid from the bottom to the top,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never again was clear the troubled course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length, for lack of breath, compelled to stop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(When he is bathed in sweat, and wasted force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Serves not his fury more) he falls, and lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the mead, and, gazing upward, sighs.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Wearied and woe-begone, he fell to ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And turned his eyes toward heaven; nor spake he aught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ate, nor slept, till in his daily round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The golden sun had broken thrice, and sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His rest anew; nor ever ceased his wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rankle, till it marred his sober thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length, impelled by phrensy, the fourth day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from his limbs tore plate and mail away.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Here was his helmet, there his shield bestowed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His arms far off; and, farther than the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His cuirass; through the greenwood wide was strowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All his good gear, in fine; and next his vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He rent; and, in his fury, naked showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His shaggy paunch, and all his back and breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And 'gan that phrensy act, so passing dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of stranger folly never shall be said.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>So fierce his rage, so fierce his fury grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That all obscured remained the warrior's sprite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, for forgetfulness, his sword he drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or wonderous deeds, I trow, had wrought the knight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But neither this, nor bill, nor axe to hew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was needed by Orlando's peerless might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He of his prowess gave high proofs and full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who a tall pine uprooted at a pull.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>He many others, with as little let</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As fennel, wall-wort-stem, or dill, up-tore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ilex, knotted oak, and fir upset,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And beech, and mountain-ash, and elm-tree hoar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He did what fowler, ere he spreads his net,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Does, to prepare the champaigne for his lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By stubble, rush, and nettle-stalk; and broke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like these, old sturdy trees and stems of oak.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The shepherd swains, who hear the tumult nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving their flocks beneath the greenwood tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some here some there across the forest hie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hurry thither, all, the cause to see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— But I have reached such point, my history,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I o'erpass this bound, may irksome be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I my story will delay to end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than by my tediousness offend.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
