<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>CANTO 24</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Odorico's and Gabrina's guilt repaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Youthful Zerbino sets at large the train;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He in defence of good Orlando's blade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is afterwards by Mandricardo slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Isabel weeps; by Rodomont is made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">War on the Tartar king, and truce again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To succour Agramant and his array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who to the lilies are well-nigh a prey.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Let him make haste his feet to disengage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor lime his wings, whom Love has made a prize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For love, in fine, is nought but phrensied rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By universal suffrage of the wise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And albeit some may show themselves more sage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Roland, they but sin in other guise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, what proves folly more than on this shelf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus, for another, to destroy oneself?</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Various are love's effects; but from one source</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All issue, though they lead a different way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He is, as 'twere, a forest, where parforce</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who enter its recess go astray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here and there pursue their devious course:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In sum, to you I, for conclusion, say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He who grows old in love, besides all pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which waits such passion, well deserves a chain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>One here may well reproach me: "Brother, thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seest not thy faults, while thou dost others fit."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— I answer that I see mine plain enow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In this my lucid interval of wit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And strive and hope withal I shall forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This dance of folly; but yet cannot quit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As quickly as I would, the faults I own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For my disease has reached the very bone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>I in the other canto said before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando, furious and insensate wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having torn off the arms and vest he wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cast away from him his faulchion bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And up-torn trees, and made the forest hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hollow cave resound, and rocky height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the noise some shepherds, on that side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their heavy sins or evil planets guide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>Viewing the madman's wonderous feats more near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The frighted band of rustics turned and fled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But they, in their disorder, knew not where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As happens oftentimes in sudden dread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The madman in a thought is in their rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seizes a shepherd, and plucks off his head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this as easily as one might take</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Apple from tree, or blossom from the brake.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>He by one leg the heavy trunk in air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upheaved, and made a mace the rest to bray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astounded, upon earth he stretched one pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who haply may awake at the last day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest, who well awake at the last day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest, who well advised and nimble are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At once desert the field and scour away:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor had the madman their pursuit deferred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had he not turned already on their herd.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>By such examples warned, the rustic crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abandoned in the fields pick, scythe, and plough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the roof of house and temple flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(For ill secure was elm or willow's bough,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From hence the maniac's horrid rage they view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, dealing kick, and bite, and scratch, and blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Horses and oxen slew, his helpless prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well the courser ran who 'scaped that day.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Already might'st thou hear how loudly ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hubbub and the din, from neighbouring farms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outcry and horn, and rustic trumpeting;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And faster sound of bells; with various arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By thousands, with spontoon, bow, spit, and sling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! from the hills the rough militia swarms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As many peasants from the vale below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make rude war upon the madman go,</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>As beats the wave upon the salt-sea shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sportive at first, which southern wind has stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the next, bigger than what went before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bigger than the second, breaks the third;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the vext water waxes evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And louder on the beach the surf is heard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The crowd, increasing so, the count assail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And drop from mountain and ascend from dale.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>Twice he ten peasants slaughtered in his mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, charging him in disarray, were slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this experiment right clearly showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To stand aloof was safest for the train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was none who from his body could draw blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For iron smote the impassive skin in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So had heaven's King preserved the count from scathe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make him guardian of his holy faith.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>He would have been in peril on that day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had he been made of vulnerable mould;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And might have learned was 'twas to cast away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His sword, and, weaponless, so play the bold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rustic troop retreated from the fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing no stroke upon the madman told.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since him no other enemy attends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando to a neighbouring township wends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>Since every one had left the place for dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No wight he found within it, small or great:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But here was homely food in plenty spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Victual, well sorting with the pastoral state.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here, acorns undistinguishing from bread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By tedious fast and fury driven to sate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His hunger, he employed his hand and jaw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On what he first discovered, cooked or raw.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Thence, repossest with the desire to rove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, through the land, did man and beast pursue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scowering, in his phrensy, wood and grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Took sometimes goat or doe of dappled hue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Often with bear and with wild boar he strove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with his naked hand the brutes o'erthrew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gorging oftentimes the savage fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swallowed the prey with all its skin and hair.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Now right, now left, he wandered, far and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout all France, and reached a bridge one day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath which ran an ample water's tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of steep and broken banks: a turret gray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was builded by the spacious river's side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discerned, from far and near, and every way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What here he did I shall relate elsewhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who first must make the Scottish prince my care.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>When Roland had departed on his quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino paused some deal; then, in his rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slowly his steed by the same path addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had been taken by Anglantes' peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor two miles on his way, I think, had prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he beheld a captive cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon a sorry, little, hackney tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by armed horseman watched on either side.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Zerbino speedily the prisoner knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Isabel, as soon, when nigh surveyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This was Sir Odoric, the Biscayan, who,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like wolf, the guardian of a lamb was made:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom, of all his friends esteemed most true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino Isabella had conveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping, one hitherto by him found just,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would now, as ever, have approved his trust.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Even then how all had chanced, with punctual lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was Isabel relating to the knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How in the pinnace she was saved, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The broken vessel sank at sea outright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Odoric's assault; and next, how bandits bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her to the cavern, in a mountain dight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Isabella yet her tale has told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When bound the malefactor they behold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The two that had Sir Odoric in their ward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The royal damsel Isabella knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deemed he was her lover and her lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That pricked beside the lady, fair of hue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More; that the bearings on his shield record</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The honours of the stem from which he grew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And found, as better they observed his cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They had judged rightly of the cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Lighting, with open arms and hurried pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They make towards Zerbino eagerly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, kneeling, with bare head, the prince embrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where lord is clipt by one of less degree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino, looking either in the face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knows one Corebo of Biscay to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Sir Almonio, his co-mate; the pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charged, under Odoric, with the galley's care.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>Almonio cried, "Since God is pleased in the end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grammercy! Isabel should be with you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My lord, I very clearly comprehend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I should deliver tidings, nothing new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I should now inform you why I wend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this offender, whom with me you view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since she, who at his hands has suffered worst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The story of his crimes will have rehearsed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"How me that traitour duped thou hast not to learn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time he rid himself of me, nor how</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Corebo, who would have avenged the scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Intended to the damsel, was laid low;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that which followed, upon my return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By her unseen or heard, she cannot know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So as to thee the story to have told;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sequel of it then will I unfold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"I seaward from the city, with a store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of nags, collected in a hurry, fare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye watchful, if the trace I can explore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those left far behind me; I repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thitherward; I arrive upon the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The place where they were left; look everywhere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor sign of them perceive upon that strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Except some steps, new-printed on the sand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"The steps I traced into the forest drear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor far within the greenwood had I wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When guided by a noise which smote my ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I saw my comrade bleeding on the ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Isabel I asked the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Odoric, and what hand had dealt his wound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thence departed, when the thing I knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeking the wretch these precipices through.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Wide circling still I go, and through that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I find no other sign of him that fled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length return to where Corebo lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had the ground about him dyed so red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he, had I made little more delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A grave would have required, and, more than bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And succour of the leech, to make him sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Craved priest and friar to lay him in the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"I had him to the neighbouring city brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And boarded with a friendly host; and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Corebo's cure in little time was wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath an old chirurgeon's skilful care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This finished, having arms and horses brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We thence together to the court repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of King Alphonso of Biscay; where I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Find out the traitor, and to fight defy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"The monarch's justice, who fair field and free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Allowed us for the duel, and my right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Destiny to boot (for Destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oftener makes conquest where she listeth, light)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So backed my arms, that felon was by me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worsted, and made a prisoner in the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alphonso, having heard his guilt confessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bade me dispose of him as liked me best.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Him would I neither loose, nor yet have slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, as thou seest, in bonds to thee convey:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That whether he should be condemned to pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or death, it should be thine his doom to say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, hearing thou wert with King Charlemagne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, in hope to find thee, took my way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I thank my God, that thee upon this ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where I least hoped to meet thee, I have found.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"As well I render thanks, that Isabel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see restored to thee, I know not how,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of whom, by reason of that traitor fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I deemed thou never more should'st tidings know."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In silence prince Zerbino hears him tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His story, gazing upon Odoric's brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In pity, more than hate, as he perpends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How foully such a goodly friendship ends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>After Almonio had his tale suspended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astounded for a while the prince stood by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wondering, that he who least should have offended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had him requited with such treachery:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, his long fit of admiration ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waking from his amazement with a sigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Questioned the prisoner in the horsemen's hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It that was true the cavalier had told.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>The faithless man alighted, and down fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his bended knees, and answered: "Sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All people that on middle earth do dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through weakness of their nature, sin and err.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One thing alone distinguishes the well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And evil doer; this, at every stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of least desire, submits, without a blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That arms, but yields as well to stronger foe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Had I been charged some castle to maintain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, without contest, on the first assault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoisted the banners of the hostile train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— For cowardice, or treason, fouler fault —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon my eyes (a well deserved pain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou might'st have justly closed the darksome vault;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, yielding to superior force, I read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I should not merit blame, but praise and meed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"The stronger is the enemy, the more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Easily is the vanquished side excused:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I could but faith maintain as, girded sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The leaguered fort to keep her faith is used;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even so, with all the sense, with all the lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By sovereign wisdom into me infused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This I essayed to keep; but in the end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To o'ermastering assault was forced to bend."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>So said Sir Odoric; and after showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Though 'twere too tedious to recount his suit)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him no light cause had stirred, but puissant goad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— If ever earnestness of prayer could boot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To melt a heart that with resentment glowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— If e'er humility produced good fruit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It well might here avail; since all that best</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moves a hard heart, Sir Odoric now exprest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Whether or no to venge such infamy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Youthful Zerbino doubted: the review</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of faithless Odorico's treachery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moved him to death the felon to pursue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The recollection of the amity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So long maintained between them, with the dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of pity cooled the fury in his mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him to mercy towards the wretch inclined.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>While Scotland's prince is doubting in such wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To keep him captive, or to loose his chain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or to remove him from before his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By dooming him to die, or live in pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loud neighing, thitherward the palfrey hies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From which the Tartar king had stript the rein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the old harridan, who had before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nigh caused Zerbino's death, among them bore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The horse, that had the others of that band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heard at a distance, thither her conveyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sore weeping came the old woman, and demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For succour, in her trouble, vainly made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino, when he saw her, raised his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To heaven, that had to him such grace displayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Giving him to decide that couple's fate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The only two that had deserved his hate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The wicked hag is kept, so bids the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he is determined what to do:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to cut off her nose and either ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now thought, and her as an example shew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next, 'twere far better, deemed the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If to the vultures he her carcase threw:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He diverse punishments awhile revolved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus the warrior finally resolved.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He to his comrades turned him round, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"To let the traitour live I am content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, if full grace he has not merited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet merits not to be so foully shent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, as I find his fault of Love was bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To give him life and liberty consent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And easily we all excuses own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When on commanding Love the blame is thrown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Often has Love turned upside down a brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of sounder wit than that to him assigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And led to mischief of far deeper stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than has so outraged us. Let Odoric find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pardon his offences; I the pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of these should justly suffer, who was blind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blind when I gave him such a trust, nor saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How easily the fire consumes the straw."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>"Then gazing upon Odoric, 'gan say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"This is the penance I enjoin to thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou a year shalt with the beldam stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever leave this while her company;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, roving or at rest, by night or day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shalt never for an hour without her be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her shall even unto death maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against whoever threatens her with pain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>"I will, if so this woman shall command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With whosoe'er he be, thou battle do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will this while that thou all France's land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From city shalt to city, wander through."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So says he: for as Odoric at his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well merits death, for his foul trespass due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This is a pitfall for his feet to shape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which it will be rare fortune if he 'scape.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>So many women, many men betrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wronged by her, have been so many more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not without strife by knight shall he be stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who was beneath his care the beldam hoar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, for their crimes, shall both alike be paid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She for her evil actions done before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he who wrongfully shall her defraud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor far can go before he finds an end.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>To keep the pact Zerbino makes him swear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mighty oath, under this penalty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That should he break his faith, and anywhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into his presence led by fortune be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without more mercy, without time for prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cruel death shall wait him, as his fee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next by his comrades (so their lord commands)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Odoric is unpinioned from his bands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Corebo frees the traitor in the end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Almonio yielding, yet as ill content:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For much Zerbino's mercies both offend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which thus their so desired revenge prevent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thence, he disloyal to his prince and friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In company with that curst woman went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What these befel Sir Turpin has not said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But more I once in other author read.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>This author vouches (I declare not who)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hence they had not one day's journey wended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Odoric, to all pact, all faith, untrue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For riddance of the pest to him commended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About Gabrina's neck a halter threw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And left her to a neighbouring elm suspended;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in a year (the place he does not name)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Almonio by the traitor did the same.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Zerbino, who the Paladin pursues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And loath would be to lose the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his Scottish squadron of himself sends news,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which for its captain well might stand in fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Almonio sends, and many matters shews,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too long at full to be recited here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Almonio sends, Corebo next; nor stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Other with him, besides the royal maid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>So mighty is the love Zerbino bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor less than his the love which Isabel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nursed for the valorous Paladin, so sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He longed to know if that bold infidel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Count had found, who in the duel tore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him from his horse, together with the sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he to Charles's camp, till the third day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be ended, will not measure back his way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>This was the term for which Orlando said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He should wait him, who yet no faulchion wears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor is there place the Count has visited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But thither in his search Zerbino fares.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Last to those trees, upon whose bark was read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ungrateful lady's writing, he repairs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Little beside the road; and there finds all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In strange disorder, rock and water-fall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Far off, he saw that something shining lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And spied Orlando's corslet on the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next his helm; but not that head-piece gay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which whilom African Almontes crowned:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He in the thicket heard a courser neigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, lifting up his visage at the sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saw Brigliadoro the green herbage browze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With rein yet hanging at his saddle-bows.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>For Durindane, he sought the greenwood, round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which separate from the scabbard met his view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next the surcoat, but in tatters, found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, in a hundred rags, the champaign strew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino and Isabel, in grief profound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood looking on, nor what to think they knew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They of all matters else might think, besides</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fury which the wretched Count misguides.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>Had but the lovers seen a drop of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They might have well believed Orlando dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while the pair, beside the neighbouring flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beheld a shepherd coming, pale with dread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He just before, as on a rock he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had seen the wretch's fury; how he shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His arms about the forest, tore his clothes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slew hinds, and caused a thousand other woes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>Questioned by good Zerbino, him the swain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all which there had chanced, informed aright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino marvelled, and believed with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although the proofs were clear: This as it might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from his horse dismounted on the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full of compassion, in afflicted plight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And went about, collecting from the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The various relics which were scattered round.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Isabel lights as well; and, where they lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dispersed, the various arms uniting goes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! them a damsel joins, who frequent sigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heaves from her heart, and doleful visage shows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If any ask me who the dame, and why</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She mourns, and with such sorrow overflows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say 'twas Flordelice, who, bound in trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of her lost lover's footsteps, sought that place.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Her Brandimart had left disconsolate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without farewell, i' the court of Charlemagne:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who there expected him six months or eight; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lastly, since he came not there again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From sea to sea, had sought her absent mate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through Alpine and through Pyrenean chain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In every place had sought the warrior, save</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within the palace of Atlantes' grave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>If she had been in that enchanted hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She might before have seen the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wandering with Bradamant, Rogero bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso and Ferrau and Brava's peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, when Astolpho chased the wizard old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the loud bugle, horrible to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Paris he returned; but nought of this</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As yet was known to faithful Flordelice.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>To Flordelice were known the arms and sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Who, as I say, by chance so joined the twain),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Brigliadoro, left without his lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet bearing at the saddle-bow his rein:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She with her eyes the unhappy signs explored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she had heard the tidings of the swain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had alike related, how he viewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando running frantic, in his mood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Here prince Zerbino all the arms unites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hangs, like a fair trophy, on a pine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, to preserve them safe from errant knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Natives or foreigners, in one short line</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the sapling's verdant surface writes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">ORLANDO'S ARMS, KING CHARLES'S PALADINE.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he would say, `Let none this harness move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who cannot with its lord his prowess prove!'</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Zerbino having done the pious deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is bowning him to climb his horse; when, lo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Tartar king arrives upon the mead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, at the trophied pine-tree's gorgeous show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beseeches him the cause of this to read;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who lets him (as rehearsed) the story know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, without further pause, the paynim lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hastes gladly to the pine, and takes the sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"None can (he said) the action reprehend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor first I make the faulchion mine today;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to its just possession I pretend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where'er I find it, be it where it may.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Orlando, this not daring to defend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has feigned him mad, and cast the sword away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if the champion so excuse his shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This is no cause I should forego my claim.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Take it not thence," to him Zerbino cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Nor think to make it thine without a fight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If so thou tookest Hector's arms of pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By theft thou hadst them, rather than by right."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without more parley spurred upon each side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well matched in soul and valour, either knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already echoed are a thousand blows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet well entered are the encountering foes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>In scaping Durindane, a flame in show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(He shifts so quickly) is the Scottish lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He leaps about his courser like a doe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where'er the road best footing does afford.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well it is that he should not forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An inch of vantage; who, if once that sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smite him, will join the enamoured ghosts, which rove</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid the mazes of the myrtle grove.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>As the swift-footed dog, who does espy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swine severed from his fellows, hunts him hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And circles round about; but he lies by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till once the restless foe neglect his guard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, while the sword descends, or hangs on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino stands, attentive how to ward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How to save life and honour from surprise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And keeps a wary eye, and smites and flies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>On the other side, where'er the foe is seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To threaten stroke in vain, or make good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He seems an Alpine wind, two hills between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in the month of March shakes leafy wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to the ground now bends the forest green.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now whirls the broken boughs, at random strewed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although the prince wards many, in the end</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One mighty stroke he cannot scape or fend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>In the end he cannot scape one downright blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which enters, between sword and shield, his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As perfect was the plate and corslet, so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thick was the steel wherein his paunch was drest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the destructive weapon, falling low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equally opened either iron vest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cleft whate'er it swept in its descent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the saddle-bow, through cuirass, went.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>And, but that somewhat short the blow descends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It would Zerbino like a cane divide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But him so little in the quick offends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This scarce beyond the skin is scarified.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than a span in length the wound extends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of little depth: of blood a tepid tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his feet descending, with a crimson line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stains the bright arms which on the warrior shine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>'Tis so, I sometimes have been wont to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hand, more white than alabaster, part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The silver cloth, with ribbon red of hue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A hand I often feel divide my heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here little vantage young Zerbino drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From strength and greater daring, and from art;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For in the temper of his arms and might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too much the Tartar king excelled the knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The fearful stroke was mightier in show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than in effect, by which the Prince was prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that poor Isabel, distraught with woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Felt her heart severed in her frozen breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Scottish prince, all over in a glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With anger and resentment was possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And putting all his strength in either hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote full the Tartar's helmet with his brand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Almost on his steed's neck the Tartar fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bent by the weighty blow Zerbino sped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, had the helmet been unfenced by spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The biting faulchion would have cleft his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king, without delay, avenged him well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Nor I for you till other season," said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Will keep this gift"; and levelled at his crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping to part Zerbino to the chest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Zerbino, on the watch, whose eager eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waits on his wit, wheels quickly to the right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not withal so quickly, as to fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The trenchant sword, which smote the shield outright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cleft from top to bottom equally;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shearing the sleeve beneath it, and the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote on his arm; and next the harness rended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And even to the champion's thigh descended.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Zerbino, here and there, seeks every way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which to wound, nor yet his end obtains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, while he smites upon that armour gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not even a feeble dint the coat retains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the other hand, the Tartar in the fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such vantage o'er the Scottish prince obtains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him he has wounded in seven parts or eight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And reft his shield and half his helmet's plate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>He ever wastes his blood; his energies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fail, though he feels it not, as 't would appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unharmed, the vigorous heart new force supplies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the weak body of the cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His lady, during this, whose crimson dyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where chased by dread, to Doralice drew near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for the love of Heaven, the damsel wooed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To stop that evil and disastrous feud.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Doralice, who as courteous was as fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ill-assured withal, how it would end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Willingly granted Isabella's prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And straight to truce and peace disposed her friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well Zerbino, by the other's care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was brought his vengeful anger to suspend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, wending where she willed, the Scottish lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left unachieved the adventure of the sword.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Fair Flordelice, who ill maintained descries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The goodly sword of the unhappy count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In secret garden, and so laments the prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foregone, she weeps for rage, and smite her front:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She would move Brandimart to this emprize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, should she find him, and the fact recount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weens, for short season will the Tartar foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exulting in the ravished faulchion go.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Seeking him morn and evening, but in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flordelice after Brandimart did fare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And widely wandered from him, who again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already had to Paris made repair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So far the damsel pricked by hill and plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She reached the passage of a river, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She saw the wretched count; but what befel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Scottish prince, Zerbino, let me tell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>For to leave Durindana such misdeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him appeared, it past all other woes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though he could hardly sit upon his steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though mighty loss of life-blood, which yet flows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now, when his anger and his heat secede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After short interval, his anguish grows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His anguish grows, with such impetuous pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He feels that life is ebbing from his veins.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>For weakness can the prince no further hie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so beside a fount is forced to stay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him to assist the pitying maid would try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But knows not what to do, not what to say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For lack of comfort she beholds him die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since every city is too far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where in this need she could resort to leech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose succour she might purchase or beseech.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>She, blaming Fortune, and the cruel sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can only utter fond complaints and vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Why sank I not in ocean, (was her cry,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When first I reared my sail upon the main?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbino, who on her his languid eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had fixt, as she bemoaned her, felt more pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than that enduring and strong anguish bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through which the suffering youth was well-nigh dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"So be thou pleased, my heart," (Zerbino cried,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"To love me yet, when I am dead and gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to abandon thee without a guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not to die, distresses me alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For did it me in place secure betide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To end my days, this earthly journey done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I cheerful, and content, and fully blest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would die, since I should die upon thy breast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"But since to abandon thee, to whom a prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not, my sad fate compels, I swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My Isabella, by that mouth, those eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By what enchained me first, that lovely hair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My spirit, troubled and despairing, hies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into hell's deep and gloomy bottom; where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To think, thou wert abandoned so by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all its woes the heaviest pain will be."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>At this the sorrowing Isabel, declining</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her mournful face, which with her tears o'erflows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the sufferer, and her mouth conjoining</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her Zerbino's, languid as a rose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rose gathered out of season, and which, pining</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fades where it on the shadowy hedgerow grows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaims, "Without me think not so, my heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On this your last, long, journey to depart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Of this, my heart, conceive not any fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I will follow thee to heaven or hell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It fits our souls together quit this sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together go, for aye together dwell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No sooner closed thine eyelids shall appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than either me internal grief will quell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or, has it not such power, I here protest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I with this sword to-day will pierce my breast.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"I of our bodies cherish hope not light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they shall have a happier fate when dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together to entomb them, may some wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply by pity moved, be hither led."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She the poor remnants of his vital sprite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Went on collecting, as these words she said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And while yet aught remains, with mournful lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The last faint breath of life devoutly sips.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>'Twas here his feeble voice Zerbino manned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crying. "My deity, I beg and pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By that love witnessed, when thy father's land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou quittedst for my sake; and, if I may</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In any thing command thee, I command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, with God's pleasure, thou live-out thy day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever banish from thy memory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, well as man can love, have I loved thee.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"God haply will provide thee with good aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To free thee from each churlish deed I fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As, when in the dark cavern thou wast stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sent, to rescue thee, Anglante's peer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So he (grammercy!) succoured thee dismaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At sea, and from the wicked Biscayneer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if thou must choose death, in place of worse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then only choose it, as a lesser curse."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>I think not these last words of Scotland's knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were so exprest, that he was understood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With these, he finished, like a feeble light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which needs supply of was, or other food.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Who is there, that has power to tell aright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gentle Isabella's doleful mood?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When stiff, her loved Zerbino, with pale face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cold as ice, remained in her embrace.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>On the ensanguined corse, in sorrow drowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel throws herself, in her despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shrieks so lout that wood and plain resound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For many miles about; nor does she spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bosom or cheek; but still, with cruel wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One and the other smites the afflicted fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wrongs her curling lock of golden grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye calling on the well-loved youth in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>She with such rage, such fury, was possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, in her transport, she Zerbino's glaive</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would easily have turned against her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill keeping the command her lover gave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that a hermit, from his neighbouring rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accustomed oft to seek the fountain-wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His flagon at the cooling stream to fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Opposed him to the damsel's evil will.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The reverend father, who with natural sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abundant goodness happily combined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with ensamples fraught and eloquence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was full of charity towards mankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With efficacious reasons her did fence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to endurance Isabel inclined;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Placing, from ancient Testament and new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Women, as in a mirror, for her view.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The holy man next made the damsel see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That save in God there was no true content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And proved all other hope was transitory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fleeting, of little worth, and quickly spent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And urged withal so earnestly his plea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He changed her ill and obstinate intent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made her, for the rest of life, desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To live devoted to her heavenly sire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>Not that she would her mighty love forbear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For her dead lord, nor yet his relics slight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These, did she halt or journey, every where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would Isabel have with her, day and night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hermit therefore seconding her care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, for his age, was sound and full of might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They on his mournful horse Zerbino placed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And traversed many a day that woodland waste.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>The cautious elder would not bear away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus all alone with him that damsel bland</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither, where in a cave, concealed from day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His solitary cell hard by did stand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within himself exclaiming: "I convey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With peril fire and fuel in one hand."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor in such bold experiments the sage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wisely would trust to prudence or to age.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>He thought to bear her to Provence, where, near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The city of Marseilles a borough stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had a sumptuous monastery; here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of ladies was a holy sisterhood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, hither to transport the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They stowed his body in a chest of wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made in a town by the way-side; and which</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was long and roomy, and well closed with pitch.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>So, compassing a mighty round, they fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through wildest parts, for many and many a day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because, the war extending every where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They seek to hide themselves as best they may:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length a cavalier arrests the pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That with foul scorn and outrage bars their way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of whom you more in fitting time shall learn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to the Tartar king I now return.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>After the fight between the two was done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already told by me, the king withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a cooling shade and river from the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His horse's reins and saddle to undo;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Letting the courser at his pleasure run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Browsing the tender grass the pasture through:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he reposed short time ere he descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An errant knight descend the mountain's side.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>Him Doralice, as soon as he his front</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uplifted, knew; and showed him to her knight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saying: "Behold! the haughty Rodomont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless the distance has deceived my sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To combat with thee, he descends the mount:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now it behoves thee put forth all thy might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To lose me, his betrothed, a mighty cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarch deems, and comes to venge his loss."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>As a good hawk, who duck or woodcock shy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Partridge or pigeon, or such other prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing towards her from a distance fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raises her head, and shows her blithe and gay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So Mandricardo, in security</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of crushing Rodomont in that affray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gladly his courser seized, bestrode the seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reined him, and in the stirrups fixt his feet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>When the two hostile warriors were so near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That words could be exchanged between the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loudly began the monarch of Argier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To threat with head and hand, in haughty strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That to repentance he will bring the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who lightly for a pleasure, rash and vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had scrupled not his anger to excite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who dearly will the offered scorn requite.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When Mandricardo: "He but vainly tries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fright, who threatens me — by words unscared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Woman, or child, or him he terrifies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Witless of warfare; not me, who regard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With more delight than rest, which others prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stirring battle; and who am prepared</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My foeman in the lists or field to meet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Armed or unarmed, on horse or on my feet."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIX-->
			<p>
				<span>They pass to outrage, shout, and ire, unsheath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The brand; and loudly smites each cruel foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like winds, which scarce at first appear to breathe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next shake the oak and ash-tree as they blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to the skies upwhirl the dusty wreath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then level forests, and lay houses low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bear the storm abroad, o'er land and main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which the flocks in greenwood-holt are slain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--C-->
			<p>
				<span>Of those two infidels, unmatched in worth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The valiant heart and strength, which thus exceed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To such a warfare and such blows give birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As suits with warrior of so bold a seed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the loud sound and horrid, trembles earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the swords cross; and to the stroke succeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quick sparks; or rather, flashing to the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bright flames by thousands and by thousands fly.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CI-->
			<p>
				<span>Without once gathering breath, without repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The champions one another still assail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Striving, now here, now there, with deadly blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rive the plate, or penetrate the mail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor this one gains, nor the other ground foregoes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, as if girded in by fosse or pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or, as too dearly sold they deem an inch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ne'er from their close and narrow circle flinch.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CII-->
			<p>
				<span>Mid thousand blows, so, with two-handed swing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On his foe's forehead smote the Tartar knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He made him see, revolving in a ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Myriads of fiery balls and sparks of light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The croupe, with head reversed, the Sarzan king</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now smote, as if deprived of all his might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stirrups lost; and in her sight, so well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beloved, appeared about to quit the sell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIII-->
			<p>
				<span>But as steel arbalest that's loaded sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By how much is the engine charged and strained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By lever or by crane, with so much more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fury returns, its ancient bent regained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in discharging its destructive store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflicts worse evil than itself sustained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So rose that African with ready blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And straight with double force the stroke repaid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Rodomont smites, and in the very place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he was smit, the Tartar in return;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But cannot wound the Sarzan in the face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because his Trojan arms the weapon turn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yes so astounds, he leaves him not in case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If it be morn or evening to discern.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont stopt not, but in fury sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A second blow, still aiming at his head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CV-->
			<p>
				<span>King Mandricardo's courser, who abhorred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The whistling of the steel which round him flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saved, with sore mischief to himself, his lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that he backed the faulchion to eschew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aimed at his master, not at him, the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote him across the head, and cleft it through.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No Trojan helm defends the wretched horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like Mandricardo, and he dies parforce.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVI-->
			<p>
				<span>He falls, and Mandricardo on the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more astound, slides down upon his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whirls his sword; to see his courser slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He storms all over fired with angry heat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At him the Sarzan monarch drives amain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who stands as firm as rock which billows beat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so it happened, that the courser good</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell in the charge, while fast the footman stood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The African, who feels his horse give way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stirrups quits, and lightly from the sell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is freed, and springs on earth: for the assay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence matched anew, stands either infidel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worse than before the battle boils, while they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With pride and anger, and with hatred swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About to close; but that, with flowing rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A messenger arrives to part the twain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>A messenger arrives, that from the Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With many others, news through France conveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who word to simple knight and captain bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To join the troops, beneath their flags arrayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he, the emperor, who the lilies wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Siege to their quarters had already laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, save quick succour thither was addrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He read, their army's scathe was manifest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The Moorish messenger not only knows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By ensigns and by vest, the warlike pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But by the circling blades, and furious blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With which no other hands could wound the air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence dared not 'twixt champions interpose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor deemed his orders an assurance were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From such impetuous fury, nor the saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which says embassadors are safe by law:</span>
			</p>
			<!--CX-->
			<p>
				<span>But to fair Doralice approached, and said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marsilius, Agramant, and Stordilane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within weak works, with scanty troops to aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were close beleaguered by the Christian train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, having told his tale, the damsel prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That this she to the warriors would explain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would accord the pair, and to their post</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dispatch, for rescue of the Moorish host.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The lady, with bold heart, 'twixt either foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threw herself, and exclaimed: "I you command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the large love you hear me, as I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That you to better use reserve the brand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that you instantly in succour go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of our host, menaced by the Christian band;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which now, besieged within its camp, attends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ruin or speedy succour from its friends.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXII-->
			<p>
				<span>The messenger rehearsed, when she had done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fully the peril of the paynim train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said that he bore letters to the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Ulien, from the son of King Troyane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The message ended, every grudge foregone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twas finally resolved between the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They should conclude a truce, and till the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moorish siege was raised, their strife delay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Intending, when from siege their Chivalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall be relieved — the one and the other knight —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No longer to remain in company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But bandy cruel war was with fell despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until determined by their arms shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom the royal dame belongs of right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she, between whose hands their solemn troth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They plighted, was security for both.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>DISCORD, at hearing this, impatient grew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With any truce or treaty ill content:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that such fair agreement should ensue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">PRIDE, who was present, could as ill consent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But LOVE was there, more puissant than the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equalled of none in lofty hardiment;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And launching from his bow his shafts of proof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With these, made PRIDE and DISCORD stand aloof.</span>
			</p>
			<!--CXV-->
			<p>
				<span>To keep the truce the rival warriors swore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since so it pleased her well, who either swayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One of their coursers lacked: for on the moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lifeless King Mandricardo's had been laid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence, thither, in good time, came Brigliador,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, feeding, by the river's margin strayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But here I find me at my canto's end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, with your licence, shall the tale suspend.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
