<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-25" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Rogero Richardetto from the pains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fire preserves, doomed by Marsilius dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to Rogero afterwards explains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fully the cause while he to death was led.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them mournful Aldigier next entertains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with them the ensuing morning sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vivian and Malagigi to set free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Bertolagi sold for hire and fee.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Oh! mighty springs of war in youthful breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impetuous force of love, and thirst of praise!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet which most avails is known aright:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For each by turns its opposite outweighs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within the bosom here of either knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Honour, be sure, and duty strongly sways:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the amorous strife between them is delayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till to the Moorish camp they furnish aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Yet love sways more; for, save that the command</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was laid upon them by their lady gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Neither would in that battle sheathe the brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he was crowned with the victorious bay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Agramant might vainly with his band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For either knight's expected succour, stay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then Love is not of evil nature still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— He can at times do good, if often ill.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>'Twas now, suspending all their hostile rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One and the other paynim cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moorish host from siege to disengage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Paris, with the gentle lady, steer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with them goes as well that dwarfish page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who tracked the footsteps of the Tartar peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he had brought the warrior front to front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In presence with the jealous Rodomont.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>They at a mead arrived, where, in disport,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knights were reposing by a stream, one pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disarmed, another casqued in martial sort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with them was a dame of visage fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of these in other place I shall report,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not now; for first Rogero is my care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That good Rogero, who, as I have shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into a well the magic shield had thrown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>He from that well a mile is hardly gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere he a courier sees arrive at speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those dispatched by King Troyano's son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To knights whom he awaited in his need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From him Rogero hears that so foredone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Charles are those who hold the paynim creed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They will, save quickly succoured in the strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As quickly forfeit liberty and life.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero stood awhile in pensive case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom many warring thoughts at once opprest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But neither fitted was the time nor place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To make his choice, or judge what promised best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The courier he dismist, and turned his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither he with the damsel was addrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom aye the Child so hurried on her way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He left her not a moment for delay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>Pursuing thence their ancient road again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They reached a city, with the westering sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, in the midst of France, from Charlemagne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marsilius had in that long warfare won:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor them to interrupt or to detain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At drawbridge or at gate, was any one:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though in the fosse, and round the palisade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood many men, and piles of arms were laid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Because the troop about that fortress see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Accompanying him, the well-known dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They to Rogero leave the passage free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor even question him from whence he came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reaching the square, of evil company</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He finds it full, and bright with ruddy flame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in the midst, is manifest to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youth condemned, with face of pallid hue.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>As on the stripling's face he turns his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which hangs declined and wet with frequent tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero thinks he Bradamant descries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So much the youth resembles her in cheer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More sure the more intently he espies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her face and shape: when thus the cavalier:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Or this is Bradamant, or I no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Am the Rogero which I was before.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>"She hath adventured with too daring will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In rescue of the youth condemned to die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for the enterprise had ended ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath there been taken, as I see. Ah! why</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was she so hot her purpose to fulfil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she must hither unattended hie!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— But I thank Heaven, that hither have I made:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since I am yet in time to lend her aid."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>He drew his falchion without more delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(His lance was broken at the other town),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, though the unarmed people making way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wounding flank, paunch, and bosom, bore them down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He whirled his weapon, and, amid the array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smote some across the gullet, cheek, or crown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Screaming, the dissipated rabble fled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The most with cloven limbs or broken head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>As while at feed, in full security,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A troop of fowl along the marish wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If suddenly a falcon from the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swoop mid the crowd, and one surprise and rend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest dispersing, leave their mate to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And only to their own escape attend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So scattering hadst thou seen the frighted throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When young Rogero pricked that crowd among.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero smites the head from six or four,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in escaping from the field are slow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to the breast divides as many more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And countless to the eyes and teeth below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I grant no helmets on their heads they wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But there were shining iron caps enow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, if fine helmets did their temples press,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His sword would cut as deep, or little less.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Such good Rogero's force and valour are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As never now-a-days in warrior dwell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet in rampant lion, nor in bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor (whether home or foreign) beast more fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply with him the earthquake might compare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or haply the great devil — not he of hell —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he who is my lord's, who moves in fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And parts heaven, earth, and ocean in his ire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>At every stroke he never less o'erthrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than one, and oftener two, upon the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And four, at once, and even five he slew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that a hundred in a thought were slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sword Rogero from his girdle drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As knife cuts curd, divides their plate and chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Falerina in Orgagna's garden made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To deal Orlando death, that cruel blade.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>But to have forged that falchion sorely rued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who saw her garden wasted by the brand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What wreck, what ruin then must have ensued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From this when wielded by such warrior's hand?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If e'er Rogero force, e'er fury shewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If e'er his mighty valour well was scanned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twas here; 'twas here employed; 'twas here displayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the desire to give his lady aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>As hare from hound unslipt, that helpless train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Defends itself against the cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many lay dead upon the cumbered plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And numberless were they who fled in fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile the damsel had unloosed the chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the youth's hands, and him in martial gear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was hastening, with what speed she might, to deck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sword in hand and shield about his neck.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He, who was angered sore, as best he cou'd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sought to avenge him of that evil crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gave such signal proofs of hardihood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As stamped him for a warrior good and true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sun already in the western flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had dipt his gilded wheels, what time the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Valiant Rogero and his young compeer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Victorious issued, of the city clear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>When now Rogero and the stranger knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clear of the city-gates, the champaigne reach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youth repays, with praises infinite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero in kind mode and cunning speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who him, although unknown, had sought to right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At risk of life, and prays his name to teach</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he may know to whom his thanks he owed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For such a mighty benefit bestowed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>"The visage of Bradamant I see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauteous features and the beauteous cheer."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero said; "and yet the suavity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I of her well-known accents do not hear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor such return of thanks appears to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In place towards her faithful cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if in very sooth it is the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How has the maid so soon forgot my name?"</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>In wary wise, intent the truth to find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero said, "You have I seen elsewhere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And have again, and yet again, divined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet know I not, nor can remember where.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say it, yourself, if it returns to mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, I beseech, your name as well declare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which I would gladly hear, in the desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To know whom I have rescued from the fire."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>" — Me, it is possible you may have seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not when nor where (the youth replied);</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I too range the world, in armour sheen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeking adventure strange on every side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or haply it a sister may have been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who to her waist the knightly sword has tied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Born with me at a birth; so like to view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The family discerns not who is who.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"You not first, second, or even fourth will be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who have in this their error had to learn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor father, brother, nor even mother me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From her (such our resemblance) can discern.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Tis true, this hair, which short and loose you see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In many guise, and hers, with many a turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in long tresses wound about her brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wide difference made between us two till now.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"But since the day, that, wounded by a Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the head (a story tedious to recite)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A holy man, to heal the damsel's sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cut short to the mid-ear her tresses bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Excepting sex and name, there is no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One from the other to distinguish; hight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I Richardetto am, Bradamant she;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo's brother and his sister we.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"And to displease you were I not afraid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You with a wonder would I entertain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which chanced from my resemblance to the maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Begun in pleasure, finishing in pain."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to whom nought more pleasing could be said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to whose ears there was no sweeter strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That what in some sort on his lady ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besought the stripling so, that he began.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"It so fell out, that as my sister through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The neighbouring wood pursued her path, a wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was dealt the damsel by a paynim crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which her by chance without a helmet found.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she was fain to trim the locks which grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clustering about the gash, to maker her sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that ill cut which in her head she bore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence, shorn, she wandered through the forest hoar.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Ranging, she wandered to a shady font;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, worn and troubled, she, in weary wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lit from her courser and disarmed her front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, couched upon the greenwood, closed her eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A tale more pleasing than what I recount</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In story there is none, I well surmise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thither repaired young Flordespine of Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in that wood was hunting with her train.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And, when she found my sister in the shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Covered, except her face, with martial gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— In place of spindle, furnished with the blade —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believed that she beheld a cavalier:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The face and manly semblance she surveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till conquered was her heart: with courteous cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She wooed the maid to hunt with her, and past</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her alone into that hold at last.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"When now she had her, fearless of surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Safe in a solitary place, that dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By slow degrees, in words and amorous wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Showed her deep-wounded heart; with sighs of flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Breathed from her inmost breast, with burning eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She spake her soul sick with desire; became</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now pale, now red; nor longer self-controlled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ravished a kiss, she waxed so passing bold.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>"My sister was assured the huntress maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Falsely conceited her a man to be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor in that need could she afford her aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And found herself in sore perplexity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">` 'Tis better that I now dispel (she said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The foolish thought she feeds, and that in me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel should a gentle woman scan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than take me for a craven man.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>"And she said well: for cravenhood it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Befitting man of straw, not warrior true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With whom so bright a lady deigned to pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So wonderous sweet and full of nectarous dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To clack like a poor cuckow to the fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hanging his coward wing, when he should woo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shaping her speech to this in wary mode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My sister that she was a damsel, showed;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"That, like Camilla and like Hyppolite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sought fame in battle-field, and near the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Afric, in Arzilla, saw the light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To shield and spear enured from infancy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A spark this quenched not; nor yet burned less bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The enamoured damsel's kindled phantasy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too tardy came the salve to ease the smart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So deep had Love already driven his dart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Nor yet less fair to her my sister's face</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared, less fair her ways, less fair her guise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet the heart returned into its place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which joyed itself within those dear-loved eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flordespine deems the damsel's iron case</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her desire some hope of ease supplies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when she thinks she is indeed a maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laments and sobs, with mighty woe downweighed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"He who had marked her sorrow and lament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That day, himself had sorrowed with the fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">`What pains (she said) did ever wight torment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So cruel, but that mine more cruel were?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I need not to accomplish my intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In other love, impure or pure, despair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rose I well might gather from the thorn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My longing only is of hope forlorn.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>" `It 'twas thy pleasure, Love, to have me shent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because by glad estate thine anger stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou with some torture might'st have been content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On other lovers used; but never word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have I found written of a female bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On love of female, mid mankind or herd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Woman to woman's beauty still is blind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ewe delights in ewe, nor hind in hind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Tis only I, on earth, in air, or sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who suffer at thy hands such cruel pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this thou hast ordained, that I may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first and last example in thy reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foully did Ninus' wife and impiously</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For her own son a passion entertain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loved was Pasiphae's bull and Myrrha's sire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But mine is madder than their worst desire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Here female upon male had set her will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had hope; and, as I hear, was satisfied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pasiphae the wooden cow did fill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Others, in other mode, their want supplied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, had he flown to me, — with all his skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dan Daedalus had not the noose untied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For one too diligent hath wreathed these strings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even Nature's self, the puissantest of things.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"So grieves the maid, so goads herself and wears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shows no haste her sorrowing to forego;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sometimes her face, sometimes her tresses tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And levels at herself the vengeful blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In pity, Bradamant the sorrow shares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And is constrained to hear the tale of woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She studies to divert, with fruitless pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The strange and mad desire; but speaks in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"She, who requires assistance, not support,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still more laments herself, with grief opprest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By this the waning day was growing short,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the low sun was crimsoning the west;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fitting hour for those to seek a port,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would not in the wood set up their rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When to this city, near her sylvan haunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Young Flordespine invited Bradament.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>"My sister the request could ill deny;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so they came together to the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, but for you, by that ill squadron I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had been compelled the cruel flame to face:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There Flordespina made her family</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Caress and do my sister no small grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, having in a female robe arraid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Past her on all beholders for a maid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Because perceiving vantage there was none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the male cheer by which she was misled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel held it wise, reproach to shun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which might by any carping tongue be said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this the rather: that the ill, which one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the two garments in her mind had bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now with the other which revealed the cheat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She would assay to drive from her conceit.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>"The ladies share one common bed that night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their bed the same, but different their repose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One sleeps, one groans and weeps in piteous plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because her wild desire more fiercely glows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on her wearied eyes should slumber light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All is deceitful that brief slumber shows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her it seems, as if relenting Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A better sex to Bradamant is given.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"As the sick man with burning thirst distrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he should sleep, — ere he that wish fulfil, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye in his troubled, interrupted rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remembers him of every once-seen rill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So is the damsel's fancy still possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In sleep, with images which glad her will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then from the empty dreams which crowd her brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She wakes, and, waking, finds the vision vain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"What vows she vowed, how oft that night she prayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To all her gods and Mahound, in despair!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— That they, by open miracle, the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would change, and give her other sex to wear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all the lady's vows were ill appaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And haply Heaven as well might mock the prayer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Night fades, and Phoebus raises from the main</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His yellow head, and lights the world again.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>"On issueing from their bed when day is broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wretched Flordespina's woes augment:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For of departing Bradamant had spoken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anxious to scape from that embarrassment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The princess a prime jennet, as a token,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forced on my parting sister, when she went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gilded housings, and a surcoat brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which her own hand had richly broidered, gave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Her Flordespine accompanied some way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, weeping, to her castle made return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So fast my sister pricked, she reached that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mount Alban; we who for her absence mourn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mother and brother, greet the martial may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her arrival with much joy discern:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For hearing nought, we feared that she was dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had remained in cruel doubt and dread.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Unhelmed, we wondered at her hair, which passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In braids about her brow, she whilom wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor less we wondered at the foreign cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the embroidered surcoat which she wore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she to us rehearsed, from first to last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The story I was telling you before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How she was wounded in the wood, and how,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For cure, were shorn the tresses from her brow;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And next how came on her, with labour spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— As by the stream she slept — that huntress bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how, with all her false semblance well content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She from the train withdrew her out of sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor left she any thing of her lament</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Untold; which touched with pity every wight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Told how the maid had harboured her, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which past, till she revisited her Hall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Of Flordespine I knew: and I had seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Saragossa and in France the maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whose bewitching eyes and lovely mien</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My youthful appetite had often strayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet her I would not make my fancy's queen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For hopeless love is but a dream and shade:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now I this proffered in such substance view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Straitway the ancient flame breaks forth anew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>"Love, with this hope, constructs his subtle ties;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who other threads for me would vainly weave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Tis thus he took me, and explained the guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In which I might the long-sought boon achieve.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Easy it were the damsel to surprise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For as the likeness others could deceive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which I to Bradamant, my sister, bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This haply might as well the maid ensnare.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Whether I speed or no, I hold it wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye to pursue whatever give delight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I with no other of my plan devise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor any seek to counsel me aright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well knowing where the suit of armour lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My sister doffed, I thither go at night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her armour and her steed to boot I take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor stand expecting until daylight break.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>"I rode all night — Love served me as a guide —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To seek the home of beauteous Flordespine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there arrived, before in ocean's tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The western sun had hid his orbit sheen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A happy man was he who fastest hied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To tell my coming to the youthful queen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Expecting from that lady, for his pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Favour and goodly guerdon to obtain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"For Bradamant the guests mistake me all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— As you yourself but now — so much the more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I have both the courser and the pall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With which she left them but the day before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flordespine comes at little interval,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such festivity and courteous lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with a face, so jocund and so gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She could not, for her life, more joy display.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Her beauteous arms about my neck she throws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fondly clasping me, my mouth she kist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If to my inmost heart the arrow goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Love directs, may well by you be wist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She leads me to her chamber of repose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In haste, not suffers others to assist</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In taking off my panoply of steel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disarming me herself from head to heel.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Then, ordering from her store a costly vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She spread it, and — as I a woman were —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lady me in that rich garment drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in a golden net confined my hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I gravely moved my eye-balls, nor confest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By gesture or by look, the sex I bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My voice, which might discover the deceit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I tuned so well that none perceived the cheat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Next to the hall, where dame and cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In crowds are gathered, we united go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who make to us such court and goodly cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As men to queen or high-born lady show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here oft I laughed at some, with secret jeer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, knowing not the sex concealed below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My flowing robe of feminine array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wooed me with wishful eyes in wanton way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"When more advanced in now the festive night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the rich board — board plenteously purveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With what in season was most exquisite —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has been some time removed, the royal maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Expects not till I of myself recite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cause, which thither me anew conveyed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By her own courtesy and kindness led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That lady prays me to partake her bed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Damsels and dames withdrawn — with all the rest —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pages and chamberlains, when now we lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One and the other, in our bed undrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With kindled torches, counterfeiting day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">`Marvel not, lady,' (her I thus addrest,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">`That I return after such short delay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, haply, thou imagined, that again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou shouldst not see me until Heaven knows when.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>" `The reason I departed from thy side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next of my return, explained shall be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could I unto thy fever have applied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By longer sojourn here, a remedy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I in thy service would have lived and died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would have been an hour away from thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But seeing how my stay increased thy woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, who could do no better, fixed to go.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Into the middle of a wood profound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By chance I from the beaten pathway strayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where near me plaintive cries I hear resound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As of a woman who intreated aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a lake of crystal I pursue the sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, there, amid the waves, a naked maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Caught on the fish-hook of a Faun, survey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would devour alive his helpless prey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>" `Upon the losel, sword in hand, I ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for I could not aid in other wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bereft of life that evil fisherman.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She in an instant to the water flies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— `Me hast thou helped not vainly,' (she began)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well shalt be rewarded — with what prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou canst demand — for know I am a nymph,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And have my dwelling in this crystal lymph;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>" `And power is mine to work portentous ends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nature and Elements I force: thy prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shape to the scope to which my strength extends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leave its satisfaction to my care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charmed by my song the moon from Heaven descends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fire can I freeze, and harden liquid air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I at times have stopt the sun, and stirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This earth beneath me by a simple word.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Treasure I covet not, nor yet aspire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O'er land or people to hold sovereign sway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor greater strength nor valour would acquire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor fame in every warfare bear away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But only to accomplish thy desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Entreat the damsel she will show some way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor one nor other method I forestall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to her choice refer me, all in all.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Scarce my demand was made, before mine eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the lymph engulphed that lady viewed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor answered she my prayer, but, for reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me with the enchanted element bedewed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which has no sooner touched my face than I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not how, am utterly transmewed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see, I feel — yet doubting what I scan —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feel, I am changed from woman into man.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV - LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>(Stazas LXV - LXIX untranslated by Rose)</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>"The thing remained concealed between us two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that our bliss endured some months; at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We were espied; and, as I sorely rue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tidings to the Spanish monarch past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou that whilere preserved'st me from the crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which me into the flames designed to cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By this mayst fully comprehend the rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But God alone can read my sorrowing breast."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>So Richardetto spake, and by his say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made the dark path they trod less irksome be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up a small height this while their journey lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Girded with cliff and cavern, drear to see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bristling with rocks, a steep and narrow way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was to that rugged hill the stubborn key;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A town, called Agrismonte, crowned the steep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Aldigier of Clermont had in keep.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Bastard of Buovo, brother to the pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Vivian and Sir Malagigi hight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who him Gerardo's lawful son declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are witnesses of little worth and light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— This, as it may! — strong, valiant, wise, and ware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Liberal, humane, and courteous was the knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the fortress of its absent lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By night and day, kept faithful watch and ward.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>His cousin Richardetto, as behoved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was courteously received by Aldigier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who him as dearly as a brother loved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made Rogero for his sake good cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not with wonted welcome; — inly moved —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He even wore a visage sad and drear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he, that day, ill-tidings had received,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence in heart and face the warrior grieved.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>To Richardetto he exclaims, instead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of greeting: "Evil news are hither blown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By a sure messenger, to-day I read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That faithless Bertolagi of Bayonne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With barbarous Lanfusa has agreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And costly spoils makes over to that crone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who will consign to him the brethren twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy Malagigi and thy Viviane;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>"These she, since Ferrau took them, aye has stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Imprisoned in a dark and evil cell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till the discourteous and foul pact was made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that false Maganzese of whom I tell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And them to-morrow, to a place conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twixt Bayonne and a town of his, will sell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him, who will be present, to advance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The price of the most precious blood in France.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"One, at a gallop, even now, to report</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tidings to our Rinaldo of the wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I sent; bur fear that he can ill resort</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him in time, the journey is so long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Men have I not to sally from my fort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And my power halts where my desire is strong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The traitor will the knights, if rendered, slay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor know I what to do nor what to say."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Sir Richardetto the ill news displease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (as they him) displease in equal wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero; who, when silent both he sees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor able any counsel to devise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaims with mickle daring: "Be at ease;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I challenge for myself the whole emprize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, to set free your brethren, in my hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than a thousand shall avail this brand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"I ask not men, I ask not aid; my spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is, I believe, sufficient to the feat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I only ask of you a guide to steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me to the place where for the exchange they meet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I even in this place will make you hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their cries, who for that evil bargain threat."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He said; nor to one listener of the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That had helped his actions, spake in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The other heard him not, or heard at most</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As we great talkers hear, who little do:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Richardetto took aside their host</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And told how him he from the fire withdrew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how he was assured, beyond his boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would in time and place his prowess shew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Twas now that better audience than before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aldigier lent, and set by him great store;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>And at the feast, where Plenty for the three</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Emptied her horn, him honoured as his lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here they conclude they can the brethren free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without more succour from their gaoler's ward.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while Sleep seized on lord and family,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save young Rogero: no repose afford</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him the thoughts, which evermore molest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, rankling in his bosom, banish rest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The siege of Agramant, to him that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Told by the messenger, he has at heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He well discerns that every least delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will he dishonour. What a ceaseless smart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will scorn inflict, what shame will him appay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he against his sovereign lord take part?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh! what foul cowardice, how foul a crime</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His baptism will appear at such a time!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>That true religion had the stripling swayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Men might at any other time conceive:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now, when needed was the warrior's aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From siege the Moorish monarch to relieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Fear and Baseness had more largely weighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his designs, would every one believe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That any preference of a better creed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This thought makes good Rogero's bosom bleed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor less to quit his Queen, her leave unsought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did with Rogero's other griefs combine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now this and now that care upon him wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which diversely his doubtful heart incline:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The unhappy lover fruitlessly had thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To find her at the abode of Flordespine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither together went (as told whilere)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To succour Richardetto, maid and peer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>He next bethinks him of the promise plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To meet at Vallombrosa's sanctuary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deems her gone thither, and that 'twill excite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her wonderment himself not there to see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could he at least a message send or write,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he with reason might not censured be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because not only he had disobeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But was departing hence, and nothing said!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>He, having thought on many things, in the end</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resolves on writing what behoves; and, though</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He knows not how his letter he shall send,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the assurance it will safely go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This hinders not; he thinks that, as they wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chance in his way some faithful Post may throw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor more delays: up leaps the restless knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And calls for pen and paper, ink and light.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>That which is needed, in obedience meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aldigier's valets bring, a careful band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youth begins to write; and, first, to greet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The maid, as wonted courtesies demand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next tells how Agramant has sent to entreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his dispatches, succour at his hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, save he quickly to his comfort goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must needs be slain or taken by his foes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Then adds, his sovereign being so bested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And praying him for succour in his pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She must perceive what blame upon his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would light, if Agramant applied in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, since with her he is about to wed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Tis fitting he should keep him with stain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ill he deems a union could endure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between aught foul and her to passing pure.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And if he erst a name, renowned and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had laboured to procure by actions fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having gained it thus, he held it dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— If this had sought to keep — with greater care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He kept it now, — and with a miser's fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guarded the treasure she with him would share;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, though distinct in body and in limb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When wedded, ought to be one soul with him;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And, as he erst by word, he now explained</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anew by writing, that the period o'er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For which he was to serve his king constrained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless it were his lot to die before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would in deed a Christian be ordained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As in resolve he had been evermore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of her kin, Rinaldo and her sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her afterwards in wedlock would require.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>"I would," he said, "relieve, with your good will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My king, besieged by Charlemagne's array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the misjudging rabble, prone to ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might never, to my shame and scandal, say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, in fair wind and weather, still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waited upon his sovereign, night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now that Fortune to King Charles is fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has with that conquering lord his ensign spread.'</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>"I fifteen days or twenty ask, that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet once again may to our army speed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that, by me from leaguering enemy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The African cantonments may be freed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will some fit and just occasion spy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile, to justify my change of creed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I for my honour make this sole request;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then wholly yours for life, in all things, rest."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero is such words his thoughts exposed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which never could by me be fully showed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And added more, nor from his task reposed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until the crowded paper overflowed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He next the letter folded and enclosed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sealed it, and within his bosom stowed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In hopes to meet next morning by the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One who might covertly that writ convey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>When he had closed the sheet, that amorous knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His eyelids closed as well, and rest ensued:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Slumber came and steeped his wearied might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In balmy moisture, from a branch imbued</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Lethe's water; and he slept till — white</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And red — a rain of flowers the horizon strewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Painting the joyous east with colours gay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When from her golden dwelling broke the day:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And when the greenwood birds 'gan, far and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Greet the returning light with gladsome strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Aldigier (who wished to be the guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon that journey, of the warlike twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who would in succour of those brethren ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rescue them from Bertolagi's chain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was first upon his feet; and either peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Issues as well from bed, when him they hear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>When clad and thoroughly in arms arrayed —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero with the cousins took his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having that pair already warmly prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The adventure on himself alone to lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But these, by love for those two brethren swayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deeming it discourtesy to obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood out against his prayer, more stiff than stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would consent that he should wend alone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>True to the time and place of change, they hie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither Sir Aldigier's advices teach;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there survey an ample band who lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exposed to fierce Apollo's heat; in reach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor myrtle-tree nor laurel they descry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor tapering cypress, ash, nor spreading beech:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But naked gravel with low shrubs discerned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Undelved by mattock and by share unturned.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Those three adventurous warriors halted where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A path went through the uncultivated plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw a knight arrive upon the lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, flourished o'er with gold, wore plate and chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on green field that beauteous bird and rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which longer than an age extends its reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more, my lord: for at my canto's close</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I find myself arrived, and crave repose.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
