<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Restored to sense, the beauteous Bradamant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finds sage Melissa in the vaulted tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hears from her of many a famous plant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And warrior, who shall issue from her womb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next, to release Rogero from the haunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of old Atlantes, learns how from the groom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brunello hight, his virtuous ring to take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus the knight’s and others’ fetters break.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Who will vouchsafe me voice that shall ascend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As high as I would raise my noble theme?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who will afford befitting words, and lend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wings to my verse, to soar the pitch I scheme?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since fiercer fire for such illustrious end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than what was wont, may well my song beseem.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this fair portion to my lord is due</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which sings the sires from whom his lineage grew.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Than whose fair line, ’mid those by heavenly grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chosen to minister this earth below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You see not, Phoebus, in your daily race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One that in peace or war doth fairer show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor lineage that hath longer kept its place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still shall keep it, if the lights which glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within me, but aright inspire my soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the blue heaven shall turn about the pole.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>But should I seek at full its worth to blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not mine were needful, but that noble lyre</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which sounded at your touch the thunderer’s praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time the giants sank in penal fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet should you instruments, more fit to raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The votive work, bestow, as I desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All labour and all thought will I combine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To shape and shadow forth the great design.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>Till when, this chisel may suffice to scale</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stone, and give my lines a right direction;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And haply future study may avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bring the stubborn labour to perfection.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return we now to him, to whom the mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of hawberk, shield, and helm, were small protection:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I speak of Pinabel the Maganzeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who hopes the damsel’s death, whose fall he sees.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>The wily traitor thought that damsel sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had perished on the darksome cavern’s floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with pale visages hurried his retreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From that, through him contaminated door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, thence returning, clomb into his seat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, like one who a wicked spirit bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To add another sin to evil deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bore off with him the warlike virgin’s steed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>Leave we sometime the wretch who, while he layed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Snares for another, wrought his proper doom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And turn we to the damsel he betrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had nigh found at once her death and tomb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She, after rising from the rock, dismayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At her shrewd fall, and gazing through the gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beheld and passed that inner door, which gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Entrance to other and more spacious cave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>For the first cavern in a second ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fashioned in form of church, and large and square;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With roof by cunning architect extended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On shafts of alabaster rich and rare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flame of a clear-burning lamp ascended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the central altar; and the glare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Illuminating all the space about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shone through the gate, and lit the cave without.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Touched with the sanctifying thoughts which wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On worthy spirit in a holy place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She prays with eager lips, and heart elate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the Disposer of all earthly grace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, kneeling, hears a secret wicket grate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the opposing wall; whence, face to face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A woman issuing forth, the maid addresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Barefoot, ungirt, and with dishevelled tresses.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>“O generous Bradamant,” the matron cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Know thine arrival in this hallowed hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was not unauthorized of heavenly guide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the prophetic ghost of Merlin told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou to this cave shouldst come by path untried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which covers the renowned magician’s mould.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here have I long time awaited thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To tell what is the heavens’ pronounced decree.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>“This is the ancient memorable cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which Merlin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a> that enchanter sage, did make:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou may’st have heard how that magician brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was cheated by the Lady of the Lake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Below, beneath the cavern, is the grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which holds his bones; where, for that lady’s sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His limbs (for such her will) the wizard spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Living he laid him there, and lies there dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Yet lives the spirit of immortal strain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lodged in the enchanter’s corpse, till to the skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The trumpet call it, or to endless pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As it with dove or raven’s wing shall rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet lives the voice, and thou shalt hear how plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From its sepulchral case of marble cries:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since this has still the past and future taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To every wight that has its counsel sought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Long days have passed since I from distant land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My course did to this cemetery steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in the solemn mysteries I scanned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Merlin to me the truth should better clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having compassed the design I planned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A month beyond, for thee, have tarried here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since Merlin, still with certain knowledge summing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Events, prefixed this moment for thy coming.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The daughter of Duke Aymon stood aghast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And silent listened to the speech; while she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knew not, sore marvelling at all that passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If ’twere a dream or a reality.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length, with modest brow, and eyes down-cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Replied (like one that was all modesty),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“And is this wrought for me? and have I merit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worthy the workings of prophetic spirit?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And full of joy the adventure strange pursues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moving with ready haste behind the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who brings her to the sepulchre which mews</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bones and spirit, erst of Merlin’s name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tomb, of hardest stone which masons use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shone smooth and lucid, and as red as flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that although no sun-beam pierced the gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its splendour lit the subterraneous room.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>Whether it be the native operation</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O certain stones, to shine like torch i’ the dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or whether force of spell or fumigation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(A guess that seems to come more near the mark)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or sign made under mystic constellation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The blaze that came from the sepulchral ark</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Discovered sculpture, colour, gems, and gilding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whatsoever else adorned the building.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Scarcely had Bradamant above the sill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lifter her foot, and trod the secret cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the live spirit, in clear tones that thrill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Addressed the martial virgin from the grave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“May Fortune, chaste and noble maid, fulfil</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thine every wish!” exclaimed the wizard brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Since from thy womb a princely race shall spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose name through Italy and earth shall ring.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“The noble blood derived from ancient Troy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mingling in thee its two most glorious streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall be the ornament, and flower, and joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of every lineage on which Phoebus beams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where genial stars lend warmth, or cold annoy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Indus, Tagus, Nile, or Danube gleams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in thy progeny and long drawn line</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall marquises, counts, dukes, and Caesers shine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Captains and cavaliers shall spring from thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who both by knightly lance and prudent lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall once again to widowed Italy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her ancient praise and fame in arms restore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in her realms just lords shall seated be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Such Numa and Augustus were of yore),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with their government, benign and sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall re-create on earth the golden age.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Then, that the will of Heaven be duly brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a fair end through thee, in fitting date,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from the first to bless thy love has wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And destined young Rogero for thy mate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let nothing interpose to break that thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But boldly tread the path perscribed by fate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor let aught stay thee till the thief be thrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By thy good lance, who keeps thee from thine own.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>Here Merlin ceased, that for the solemn feat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melissa might prepare with fitting spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To show bold Bradamant, in aspect meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heirs who her illustrious race should swell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence many sprites she chose; but from what seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Evoked, I know not, or if called from hell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gathered in one place (so bade the dame),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In various garb and guise the shadows came.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>This done, into the church she called the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where she had drawn a magic ring, as wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As might contain the damsel, prostrate laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the full measure of a palm beside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on her head, lest spirit should invade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A pentacle for more assurance tied.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So bade her hold her peace, and stand and look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then read, and schooled the demons from her book.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Lo! forth of that first cave what countless swarm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Presses upon the circle’s sacred round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, when they would the magic rampart storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Finds the way barred as if by fosse or mound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then back the rabble turns of various form;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when it thrice with bending march has wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About the circle, troops into the cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where stands that beauteous urn, the wizard’s grave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“To tell at large the puissant acts and worth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And name of each who, figured in a sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is present to our eyes before his birth,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Said sage Melissa to the damsel bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“To tell the deeds which they shall act on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were labour not to finish with the night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence I shall call few worthies of thy line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As time and fair occasion shall combine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“See yonder first-born of thy noble breed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who well reflects thy fair and joyous face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, first of thine and of Rogero’s seed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall plant in Italy thy generous race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In him behold who shall distain the mead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his good sword with blood of Pontier base;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mighty wrong chastised, and traitor’s guilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom his princely father’s blood was spilt.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“By him King Desiderius shall be pressed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The valiant leader of the Lombard horde:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the fiefs of Calaon and Este;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this imperial Charles shall make him lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hubert,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a> thy grandson, comes behind; the best</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Italy, with arms and belted sword:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who shall defend the church from barbarous foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more than once assure her safe repose.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Alberto next, unconquered captain, see,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose trophies shall so many fanes array.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hugh, the bold son, is with the sire, and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall conquer Milan, and the snakes display.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Azo, that next approaching form shall be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, his good brother dead, the Insubri sway.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! Albertazo! by whose rede undone,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See Berengarius banished, and his son.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“With him shall the imperial Otho join</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In wedlock worthily his daughter fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lo! another Hugh! O noble line!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O! sire succeeded by an equal heir!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, thwarting with just cause their ill design,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall thrash the Romans’ pride who overbear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall from their hands the sovereign pontiff take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the third Otho, and their leaguer break.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“See Fulke, who to his brother will convey<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All his Italian birth-right, and command</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take a mighty dukedom far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From his fair home, in Almayn’s northern land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There he the house of Saxony shall stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prop the ruin with his saving hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This in his mother’s right he shall possess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with his progeny maintain and bless.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“More famed for courtesy than warlike deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Azo the second, he who next repairs!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bertoldo and Albertazo are his seed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, lo! the father walkes between his heirs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Parma’s walls I see the Germans bleed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their second Henry quelled; such trophy bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The one renowned in story’s future page:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The next shall wed Matilda, chaste and sage.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“His virtues shall deserve so fair a flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(And in his age, I wot, no common grace)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hold the half of Italy in dower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that descendent of first Henry’s race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo shall succeed him in his power,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pledge of Bertoldo’s wedded love, and chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fierce Frederick Barbarossa’s hireling bands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saving the church from his rapacious hands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Another Azo rules Verona’s town,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With its fair fields; and two great chiefs this while</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(One wears the papal, one the imperial crown),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The baron, Marquis of Ancona style.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to show all who rear the gonfalon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the consistory, amid that file,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were task too long; as long to tell each deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Achieved for Rome by thy devoted seed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“See Fulke and Obyson,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a> more Azos, Hughs!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both Henrys!⁠—mark the father and his boy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two Guelphs: the first fair Umbria’s land subdues,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shall Spoleto’s ducal crown enjoy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Behold the princely phantom that ensues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall turn fair Italy’s long grief to joy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I speak of the fifth Azo of thy strain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By whom shall Ezelin be quelled and slain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Fierce Ezelin, that most inhuman lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who shall be deemed by men a child of hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And work such evil, thinning with the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in Ausonia’s wasted cities dwell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rome shall no more her Anthony record,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her Marius, Sylla, Nero, Cajus fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this fifth Azo shall to scathe and shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Put Frederick, second Caeser of the name.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“He, with his better sceptre well contented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall rule the city, seated by the streams,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Phoebus to his plaintive lyre lamented</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The son, ill-trusted with the father’s beams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Cygnus spread his pinions, and the scented</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amber was wept, as fabling poet dreams.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him such honour shall the church decree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fit guerdon of his works, and valour’s fee.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>“But does no laurel for his brother twine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aldobrandino, who will carry cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Rome (when Otho, with the Ghibelline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the troubled capital strikes fear),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make the Umbri and Piceni sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their shame, and sack the cities far and near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then hopeless to relieve the sacred hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sue to the neighbouring Florentine for gold:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“And trust a noble brother to his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Boasting no dearer pledge, the pact to bind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next, victorious o’er the German bands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give his triumphant ensigns to the wind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the afflicted church restore her lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And take due vengeance of Celano’s kind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then die, cut off in manhood’s early flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the banners of the Papal power?</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“He, dying, leaves his brother Azo heir</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Pesaro and fair Ancona’s reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the cities which ’twixt Tronto are,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And green Isauro’s stream, from mount to main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With other heritage, more rich and rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Greatness of mind, and faith without a strain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All else is Fortune’s in this mortal state;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Virtue soars beyond her love and hate.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“In good Rinaldo equal worth shall shine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Such is the promise of his early fire)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If such a hope of thine exalted line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dark Fate and Fortune wreck not in their ire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! from Naples in this distant shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Naples, where he is hostage for his sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His dirge is heard: A stripling of thy race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Young Obyson, shall fill his grandsire’s place.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“This lord to his dominion shall unite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gay Reggio, joined to Modena’s bold land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his redoubted valour lend such light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The willing people call him to command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sixth of the name, his Azo rears upright<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The church’s banner in his noble hand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair Adria’s fief to him in dower shall bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The child of second Charles, Sicilia’s king.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>“Behold in yonder friendly group agreed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many fair princes of illustrious name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Obyson, Albert famed for pious deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aldobrandino, Nicholas the lame.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But we may pass them by, for better speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faenza conquered, and their feats and fame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Adria (better held and surer gain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which gives her title to the neighbouring main:</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>“And that fair town, whose produce is the rose,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rose which gives it name in Grecian speech:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, too, which fishy marshes round enclose,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Po’s two currents threat with double breach;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose townsmen loath the lazy calm’s repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pray that stormy waves may lash the beach.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I pass, mid towns and towers, a countless store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Argenta, Lugo, and a thousand more.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>“See Nicholas, whom in his tender age,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The willing people shall elect their lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He who shall laugh to scorn the civil rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the rebellious Tideus and his horde;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose infantine delight shall be to wage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mimic fight, and sweat with spear and sword:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And through the discipline such nurture yields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall flourish as the flower of martial fields.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“By him rebellious plans are overthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And turned upon the rash contriver’s head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so each stratagem of warfare blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That vainly shall the cunning toils be spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the third Otho this too late is known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Parma and the pleasant Reggio dread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who shall by him be spoiled in sudden strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his possessions and his wretched life.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“And still the fair dominion<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a> shall increase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And without wrong its spreading bounds augment;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor its glad subjects violate the peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless provoked some outrage to resent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence its wealth and welfare shall not cease;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the Divine Disposer be content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To let it flourish (such his heavenly love!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the celestial spheres revolve above.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Lo! Lionel! lo! Borse great and kind!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First duke of thy fair race, his realm’s delight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who reigns secure, and shall more triumphs find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In peace, than warlike princes win in fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who struggling Fury’s hands shall tie behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her back, and prison Mars, removed from sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His fair endeavours bent to bless and stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The people, that his sovereign rule obey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Lo! Hercules, who may reproach his neighbour,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With foot half burnt, and halting gait and slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That at Budrìo, with protecting sabre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He saved his troops from fatal overthrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that, for guerdon of his glorious labour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He should distress and vex him as a foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chased into Barco. It were hard to say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If most he shine in peace or martial fray.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Lucania, Puglia, and Calabria’s strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall with the rumour of his prowess ring:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he shall strive in duel, hand to hand,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gain the praise of Catalonia’s king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, with the wisest captains of the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His worth shall class; such fame his actions bring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he the fief shall win like valiant knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which thirty years before was his of right.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“To him his grateful city owes a debt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The greatest subjects to their lord can owe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not that he moves her from a marsh, to set</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her stones, where Ceres’ fruitful treasures grow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor that he shall enlarge her bounds, nor yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he shall fence her walls against the foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor that he theatre and dome repairs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And beautifies her streets and goodly squares;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Not that he keeps his lordship well defended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the winged lions’ claws and fierce attacks;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor that, when Gallic ravage is extended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the invader all Italia sacks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His happy state alone is unoffended;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unharassed, and ungalled by toll or tax.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not for these blessings I recount, and more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His grateful realm shall Hercules adore;</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>“So much as that from him shall spring a pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of brothers, leagued no less by love than blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who shall be all that Leda’s children were;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The just Alphonso, Hippolite the good.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as each twin resigned the vital air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His fellow to redeem from Stygian flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So each of these would gladly spend his breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for his brother brave perpetual death.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>“In these two princes’ excellent affection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their happy lieges more assurance feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than if their noble town, for its protection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were girded twice by Vulcan’s works of steel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so Alphonso in his good direction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Justice, with knowledge and with love, shall deal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astrea shall appear returned from heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To this low earth to varying seasons given.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Well is it that his wisdom shines as bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As his good sire’s, nor is his valour less;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since here usurping Venice arms for fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her full troops his scanty numbers press,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There she (I know not if more justly hight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mother or stepmother) brings new distress;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, if a mother, scarce to him more mild</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Progne or Medea to her child.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“This chief, what time soever he shall go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forth with his faithful crew, by night or day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By water or by land, will shame the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With memorable rout and disarray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this too late Romagna’s sons shall know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Led against former friends in bloody fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who shall bedew the campaign with their blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Santern, Po, and Zaniolus’ flood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“This shall the Spaniard know, to his dismay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid the same bounds, whom papal gold shall gain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who shall from him Bastìa win and slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With cruel rage, her hapless Castellain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The city taken; but shall dearly pay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His crime, the town retrieved, and victor slain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since in the rescued city not a groom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is left alive, to bear the news to Rome.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Tis he, who with his counsel and his lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall win the honours of Romagna’s plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And open to the chivalry of France</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The victory over Julius, leagued with Spain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Paunch-deep in human blood shall steeds advance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that fierce strife, and struggle through the slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid crowded fields, which scarce a grace supply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Greek, Italian, Frank, and Spaniard die.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Lo! who in priestly vesture clad, is crowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With purple hat, conferred in hallowed dome!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis he, the wise, the liberal, the renowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hippolitus, great cardinal of Rome;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose actions shall in every region sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where’er the honoured muse shall find a home:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whose glad era, by indulgent heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As to Augustus’ is a Maro given.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“His deeds adorn his race, as from his car</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The glorious sun illumes the subject earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than the silver moon or lesser star;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So far all others he transcends in worth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see this captain, ill bested for war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Go forth afflicted, and return in mirth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Backed by few foot, and fewer cavaliers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He homeward barks, and fifteen gallies steers.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Two Sigismonds, the first, the second, see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To these Alphonso’s five good sons succeed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose glories spread o’er seas and land shall be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first shall wed a maid of France’s seed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This is the second Hercules; and <em>he</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(That you may know their every name and deed),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hippolitus; who with the light shall shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his wise uncle, gilding all his line.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Francis the third comes next; the other two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alphonsos both;⁠—but yet again I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy line through all its branches to pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair virgin, would too long protract thy stay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Phoebus, many times, to mortal view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would quench and light again the lamp of day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, with thy leave, ’tis time the pageant cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I dismiss the shades and hold my peace.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>So with the lady’s leave the volume closed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose precepts to her will the spirits bent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they, where Merlin’s ancient bones reposed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the first cavern disappearing, went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then Bradamant her eager lips unclosed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since the divine enchantress gave consent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“And who,” she cried, “that pair of sorrowing mien</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alphonso and Hippolitus between?</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“Sighing, those youths advanced amid the show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their brows with shame and sorrow overcast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With downward look, and gait subdued and slow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I saw the brothers shun them as they passed.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melissa heard the dame with signs of woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus, with streaming eyes, exclaim’d at last:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Ah! luckless youths,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a> with vain illusions fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither by wicked men’s bad counsel led!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“O, worthy seed of Hercules the good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let not their guilt beyond thy love prevail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! the wretched pair are of thy blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So many prevailing pity turn the scale!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in a sad and softer tone pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I will not further press the painful tale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chew on fair fancy’s food: Nor deem unmeet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will not with a bitter chase the sweet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Soon as to-morrow’s sun shall gild the skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his first light, myself the way will show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To where the wizard knight Rogero sties;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And built with polished steel the ramparts glow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So long as through deep woods thy journey lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till, at the sea arrived, I shall bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such new instructions for the future way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou no more shalt need Melissa’s stay.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>All night the maid reposes in the cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the best part in talk with Merlin spends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While with persuasive voice the wizard grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her Rogero’s honest love commends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till from the vault goes forth that virgin brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As through the sky the rising sun ascends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By path, long space obscure on either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The weird woman still her faithful guide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>They gain a hidden glen, which heights inclose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mountains inaccessible to man:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they all day toil on, without repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where precipices frowned and torrents ran.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And (what may some diversion interpose)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweet subjects of discourse together scan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In conference, which best might make appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rugged road less dismal and severe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Of these the greater portion served to guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Such the wise woman’s scope) the warlike dame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And teach by what device might be untied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero’s gyves, if stedfast were her flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“If thou wert Mars himself, or Pallas,” cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sage Melissa; “though with thee there came</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than King Charles or Agramant command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the wizard foe thou could’st not stand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Besides that it is walled about with steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And inexpugnable his tower, and high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besides that his swift horse is taught to wheel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And caracol and gallop in mid sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bears a mortal shield of power to seal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soon as ’tis exposed, the dazzled eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so invades each sense the splendour shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he who sees the blaze remains as dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And lest to shut thine eyes, thou should’st suppose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might serve, contending with the wizard knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How would’st thou know, when both in combat close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he strikes home, or when eschews the fight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to escape the blaze which blinds his foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And render vain each necromantic sleight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have here a speedy mean which cannot miss;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor can the world afford a way but this.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“King Agramant of Africa a ring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thieved from an Indian queen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a> by subtle guiles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has to a baron of his following</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Consigned, who now precedes us by few miles;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brunello he. Who wears the gift shall bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To nought all sorceries and magic wiles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In thefts and cheats Brunello is as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Instructed, as the sage in charm and spell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>“Brunello, he so practised and so sly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As now I tell thee, by his king is sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he with aid of mother wit may try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of this ring, well proved in like event,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take Rogero from the castle high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So has he boasted, by the wizard pent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to his lord such promise did impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who has Rogero’s presence most at heart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>“That his escape to thee alone may owe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not to the king, the youthful cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How to release Rogero from his foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his enchanted cage, prepare to hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Three days along the shingle shalt thou go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside the sea, whose waves will soon appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thee the third day shall to a hostel bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he shall come who bears the virtuous ring.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>“That thou may’st recognise the man, in height</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Less than six palms, observe one at this inn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of black and curly hair, the dwarfish wight!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beard overgrown about the cheek and chin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With shaggy brow, swoln eyes, and cloudy sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A nose close flattened, and a sallow skin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To this, that I may make my sketch complete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Succinctly clad, like courier, goes the cheat.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Thy conversation with this man shall turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon enchantment, spell, and mystic pact:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thou shalt, in thy talk, appear to yearn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To prove the wizard’s strength, as is the fact.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, lady, let him not thy knowledge learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his good ring, which mars all magic act:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He shall propose to bring thee as a guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the tall castle, whither thou would’st ride.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“Follow him close, and viewing (for a sign),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now near, the fortress of the enchanter hoar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let no false pity there thy mind incline</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To stay the execution of my lore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give him his death; but let him not divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy thought, nor grant him respite; for before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thine eyes, concealed by it, the caitiff slips</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If once he place the ring between his lips.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Discoursing thus, they came upon the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Garonne near fair Bordeaux meets the tide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here, fellow travellers no more to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some natural tears they drop and then divide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Duke Aymon’s child, who slumbers not till she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Release her knight, holds on till even-tide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas then the damsel at a hostel rested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Sir Brunello was already guested.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The maid Brunello knows as soon as found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So was his image on her mind impressed),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And asks him whence he came, and whither bound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he replies and lies, as he is pressed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dame, who is forewarned, and knows her ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feigns too as well as he, and lies her best:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And changes sex and sect, and name and land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her quick eye oft glances at his hand;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Oft glances at his resless hand, in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he might undetected make some prize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever lets the knave approach too near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well knowing his condition: In this guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The couple stand together, when they hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A sudden sound: but what that sound implies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, sir, shall tell hereafter with its cause;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first shall break my song with fitting pause.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
