<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-27" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>By good Rogero and those paynims three</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defeated, Charlemagne to Paris flies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already all, throughout their chivalry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are mad with spite and hatred; jars arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strife; and means to still their enmity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their sovereign is unable to devise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From him departs the monarch of Argier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who is rejected of his lady dear.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>A woman for the most part reasons best</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon a sudden motion, and untaught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For with that special grace the sex is blest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid those so many gifts, wherewith ’tis fraught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But man, of a less nimble wit possest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is ill at counsel, save, with sober thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He ruminates thereon, content to spend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Care, time and trouble to mature his end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><em>That</em> seemed good counsel, but was ill indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Malagigi’s, as before was said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit he so rescued in his need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His cousin Richardet, with odds o’erlaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When from the paynim monarchs him he freed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By ready demon, who his hest obeyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For sure he never deemed they should be borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where they would work the Christian army scorn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Had he some little prize for counsel stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(We with the same success may well suppose)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to his cousin might have furnished aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet brought not on the Christian host their foes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That evil sprite he might as well have made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, who embodied in the palfrey goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eastward or west, so far that lady bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That France should hear no further of the pair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So the two lovers, following her who flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To other place than Paris might be brought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But this calamity was a surprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On Malagigi, through his little thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fiendish malice, banished from the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which ever blood and fire and ravage sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guided them by that way to Charles’ disaster;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left to his choice by him, the wizard master.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The wayward fiend who makes that palfrey ramp</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bears off the frighted Doralice amain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor river nor yet yawning ditch, or swamp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wood, rock, or rugged cliff, the steed restrain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till, traversing the French and English camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And other squadrons of the mingled train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the holy flag of Christ arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to Granada’s king the fair conveyed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Sarzan and the Tartar the first day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That royal damsel a long while pursue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because her distant form they yet survey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But finally they lose that lady’s view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, like a lyme-dog, whom the hunters lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On hare or roebuck’s trail, the valiant two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Follow upon her track, nor halt, till told</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she is harboured in her father’s hold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Guard thyself, Charles: for, lo! against thee blown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is such a storm, that I no refuge see:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor these redoubted monarchs come alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But those of Sericane and Circassy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While Fortune, who would probe thee to the bone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has taken those two shining stars from thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who kept thee by their wisdom and their light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thou remainest blind and wrapt in night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis of the valiant cousins<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-320" id="noteref-320" epub:type="noteref">320</a> I would speak:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of these, Orlando of his wit bereft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Naked, in sun or shower, by plain or peak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wanders about the world, a helpless weft;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, in wisdom little less to seek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rinaldo, in thy peril thee has left;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, for in Paris-town she is not found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In search of his Angelica is bound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A cunning, old enchanter him deceived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As in the outlet of my tale was said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deluded by a phantom, he believed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica was with Orlando fled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence with jealousy, at heart, aggrieved</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Lover ne’er suffered worse) to Paris sped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence he, as soon as he appeared at court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By chance, was named to Britain to resort.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now, the field won, wherein with mickle fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He drove King Agramant his works behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Paris yet again the warrior came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Searched convent, tower, and house, and, save confined</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twixt solid walls or columns be the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her will the restless lover surely find:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor her nor yet Orlando he descries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So forth in the desire to seek them hies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her to Anglantes or to Brava brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He deemed the Count enjoyed in mirth and play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vainly, here and there, that damsel sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor here nor there, descried the long-sought prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Paris he repaired again, in thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paladin returning to waylay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because he deemed he could not rove at large</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without that Town, but on some special charge.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Within he takes a day or two’s repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, when he finds Orlando comes not there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again to Brava and Anglantes goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inquiring tidings of the royal fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor, whether morning dawns or noontide glows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Nor night nor day⁠—his weary steed does spare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor once⁠—but twice a hundred times⁠—has run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The self-same course, by light of moon or sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the ancient foe, deluded by whose say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the forbidden fruit Eve raised her hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turned his wan eyes on Charlemagne one day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he the good Rinaldo absent scanned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seeing what foul rout and disarray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might at that time be given to Charles’s band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all the Saracens the choice and flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marshalled in arms against the Christian power.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>King Sacripant and King Gradasso (who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whilere companionship in war had made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When from Atlantes’ palace fled the two)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together to unite their arms, in aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of royal Agramant’s beleaguered crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the ruin of King Charles, he swayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where through unknown lands the warriors hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made smooth the way, and served them as a guide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thither another fiend that ruthless foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bade Rodomont and Mandricardo bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through ways, by which his comrade was not slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the affrighted Doralice to fare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A third, lest they their enterprize forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero and Marphisa has in care:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But <em>their</em> conductor journeys not so fast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hence that martial pair arrives the last.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Later by half an hour, against their foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So matched, Rogero and Marphisa speed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because the sable angel, who his blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aimed at the bands that held the Christian creed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Provided, that the contest which arose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About that horse, his work should not impede;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had again been kindled, had the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont and Rogero, met again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The first four ride until themselves they find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the besiegers and besieged they view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And see the banners shaking in the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the cantonments of those armies two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here they short counsel took, and next opined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In spite of Charlemagne’s beleaguering crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To carry speedy succour to their liege,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rescue royal Agramant from siege.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where thickest camped lay Charles’s host, they spurred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Closing their files against the Christian foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Afric and Spain!” is the assailants’ word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom at all points the Franks for paynims know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“To arms, to arms!” throughout their camp is heard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first is felt the Moorish sabre’s blow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even on the rear-guard falls the vengeful stroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not charged alone, but routed, beat and broke.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Christian host throughout is overthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how they know not, in tumultuous wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that it is a wonted insult done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Switzer or by Gascon, some surmise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But⁠—since the reason is to most unknown⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each several nation to its standard flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This to the drum, that to the trumpet’s sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shriek and shout from earth to heaven redound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All armed is Charlemagne, except his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, girt with paladins, his faithful stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived demanding what alarm has bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Disorder in his host and disarray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stopt with menace this or that who fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many fugitives, upon their way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some with maimed face, breast, arm, or hand, espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And some with head or throat with life-blood dyed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Advancing, he on earth saw many more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or rather in a lake of crimson laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Horribly weltering in their own dark gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beyond the leech’s and magician’s aid;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-321" id="noteref-321" epub:type="noteref">321</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And busts dissevered from the heads they bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And legs and arms⁠—a cruel show⁠—surveyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, from the first cantonments to the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saw slaughtered men on all sides as he past.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where the small band advances in such wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deserving well eternal praise to gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vouching their deeds, a long-drawn furrow lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A signal record of their might and main.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His army’s cruel slaughter, with surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anger and rage, is viewed by Charlemagne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So he whose shattered walls have felt its force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout his mansion tracks the lightning’s course.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not to the ramparts of the paynim crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Agramant as yet had pierced this aid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-322" id="noteref-322" epub:type="noteref">322</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, on the further side, these other two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero and Marphisa, thither made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, once or twice, that worthy pair a view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have taken of the ground, and have surveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The readiest way assistance to afford,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They swiftly move in succour of their lord.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As when we spark to loaded mine apply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the long furrow, filled with sable grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So fast the furious wildfire darts, that eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursues the progress of the flash with pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as dire ruin follows, and from high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The loosened rock and solid bastion rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So bold Rogero and Marphisa rush</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To battle, so the Christian squadrons crush.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Front and askance, the assailants smote, and low</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On earth heads, arms, and severed shoulders lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where’er the Christian squadrons were too slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To free the path and break their close array.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whoe’er has seen the passing tempest blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the hill or valley, in its way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One portion ravage and another leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May so their course amid that host conceive.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Many who had escaped by quick retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont and those other furious three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thank God that he had given them legs and feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith to fly from that calamity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the Child and damsel new defeat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encounter, while with endlong course they flee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As man, no matter if he stands or run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeks vainly his predestined doom to shun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who ’scape one peril, into other fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pay the penalty of flesh and blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, by the teeth of dog, is wont to die</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fox, together with her infant brood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By one who dwells her ancient cavern nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unearthed, and with a thousand blows pursued;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When from some unsuspected place, that foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has filled with fire and smoke the den below.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa and the Child, of danger clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enter the paynim ramparts; and, with eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upturned, the Saracens, with humble cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thank Heaven for the success of that emprize:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paladins no longer are their fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The meanest Moor a hundred Franks defies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ’tis resolved, without repose, again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To drench with Christian blood the thirsty plain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At once a formidable larum rose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Horns, drums, and shrilling clarions filled the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the wind ruffles, as it comes and goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Banner and gonfalon of various dyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Germans and the warlike Bretons close:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ranged on the other part, in martial wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Italians, English, French, were seen, and through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those armies furious war blazed forth anew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The force of the redoubted Rodomont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And <em>that</em> of Agrican’s infuriate son,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-323" id="noteref-323" epub:type="noteref">323</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><em>That</em> of Rogero, valiant’s copious font,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso’s, so renowned for trophies won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The martial maid, Marphisa’s fearless front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And might of Sacripant, excelled by none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made Charles upon Saint John and Denys call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fly for shelter to his Paris wall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of fierce Marphisa and her bold allies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The unconquered daring and the wondrous might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir, was not of a nature⁠—of a guise⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be conceived, much less described aright:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The number slaughtered hence may you surmise!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What cruel blow King Charles sustained in fight!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Add to these warriors of illustrious name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than one Moor with Ferraù known to Fame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Many through reckless haste were drowned in Seine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all too narrow was the bridge’s floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An wished, like Icarus, for wings in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having grim death behind them and before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save Oliver, and Ogier hight the Dane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paladins are prisoners to the Moor:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wounded beneath his better shoulder fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first, that other with a broken head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, like Orlando and Duke Aymon’s son,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-324" id="noteref-324" epub:type="noteref">324</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had faithful Brandimart thrown up the game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charles had from Paris into exile gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he had scaped alive so fierce a flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brandimart does his best, and when ’tis done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yields to the storm: thus Fortune, fickle dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now smiles upon the paynim monarch, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besieges royal Charlemagne anew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From earth beneath the widow’s outcry swells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mingled with elder’s and with orphan’s prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the pure serene, where Michael dwells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rising above this dim and troubled air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the blest archangel loudly tells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How the devouring wolf and raven tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His faithful English, French, and German train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose slaughtered bodies overspread the plain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Red blushed the blessed angel, who believed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He ill obedience to his lord had paid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in his anger, deemed himself deceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the perfidious Discord and betrayed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He his Creator’s order had received</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To stir the Moors to strife, nor had obeyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had rather in their eyes who marked the event,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared throughout to thwart his high intent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As servant faithful to his lord, and more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In love than memory strong, who finds that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has that forgotten which at his heart-core</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As precious as his life and soul should be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hastes to repair his error, nor before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He mend that fault, again his lord will see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So not to God <abbr>St.</abbr> Michael will ascend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he has achieved his holy end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again he to that monastery flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where whilom he had Discord seen; and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seated in chapter sees her, while anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their yearly officers elected are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She taking huge delight those friers to view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That at each other hurled their books of prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His hand within her locks the archangel twists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deals her endless scathe with feet and fists.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On her he next a cross’s handle broke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith her back, and arms, and head he plies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His mercy with loud voice the wretch bespoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hugged that angel’s knees with suppliant cries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Michael suspends not the avenging stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till hunted to the Moorish camp she flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then thus; “Believe worse vengeance yet in store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If I beyond these lines behold thee more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Albeit in back and arms all over shent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was Discord by that angel, in her fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of suffering yet again such chastisement,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such horrid fury and such blows severe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She speedily to take her bellows went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, adding food to what she lit whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And setting other ready piles afire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kindled in many hearts a blaze of ire;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And good Rogero (she inflames them so)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Rodomont and Mandricardo fares</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Agramant; and all (since now the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynims pressed no more, the vantage theirs)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him the seed of their dissensions show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what the bitter produce which it bears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to the judgment of the king refer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who first in listed field his claim should stir.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As well Marphisa to Troyano’s son,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-325" id="noteref-325" epub:type="noteref">325</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Relates her case, and will conclude the fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which with the Tartar king she had begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because by him provoked to that assay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor will she yield her place to any one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No, not a single hour, yet less a day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with loud instances maintains her right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Mandricardo first to wage the fight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To have the first possession of the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less renowned king Rodomont contended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which he, the African array to shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had interrupted and till now suspended.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero to King Agramant appealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As having borne too long, though sore offended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Rodomont form him detained his horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor yet would meet him first in martial course.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Tartar king, for more perplexity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Denied on any ground Rogero’s right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bearer of the white-winged bird to be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was so passing wood with wrath and spite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, if to this those others would agree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would at once those several quarrels fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so those others would as well have done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If Agramant’s consent they could have won.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>King Agramant, with prayer and kingly word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had willingly appeased that jarring crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But since the foes were deaf to all accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would assent to peace or truce anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Considered how at least he might afford</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The field of each of them in order due;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as the best resolve, at last decreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each should by lot possess the listed mead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Four lots the monarch bade prepare, which done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><em>This</em> “Rodomont and Mandricardo” said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Rogero and Mandricardo” were in one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In one, “Rogero and Rodomont” were read;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><em>That</em> “Mandricardo and Marphisa” run:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next, as the fickle goddess, Fortune, led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lots are drawn, and in the first appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Tartar king and sovereign of Argier.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rogero and Mandricardo for that play</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were next; Rogero and Rodomont were third;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa’s lot and Mardricardo’s lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At bottom; whence the dame was deeply stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor young Rogero seems a whit more gay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who knows the prowess of those two preferred</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will nothing in the listed combat leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him or for Marphisa to achieve.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There lies a place, of Paris little wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Covering a mile or somewhat less, and round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like ancient theatre, on every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encompast by a tall and solid mound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With castle whilom was it fortified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which sword and fire had levelled with the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Parmesan like circle does survey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whenever he to Borgo wends his way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In this place is prepared the listed mead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which palisades of little height inclose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A square, of just proportions for that need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With two capacious gates, as usage goes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The day on which to combat have agreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those valiant knights, who will not balk their foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beside the palisades, to left and right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Facing each entrance, are pavilions pight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In that, which looks towards the western sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is lodged the giant monarch of Argier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him assist his serpent-hide to don</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bold Ferraù and Circassia’s cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso and the puissant Falsiron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that which fronts the morning hemisphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clothe with their hands, in Trojan plate and chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The good successor of King Agricane.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>High on a throne of ample state appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agramant and Marsilius; next in place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were Stordilane and all the chiefs, revered</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout the squadrons of the paynim race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Happy was he who found himself upreared</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On mound or tree, above that level space.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Great was the throng, and round the palisade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On every side the eddying people swayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Were seated with the Queen of fair Castille</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Queens, princesses, and dames of noble strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Arragon, Granada, and Seville,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Atlas’ columns; and amid the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assembled to behold that fierce appeal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was placed the daughter of King Stordilane:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two costly vests⁠—one red, one green⁠—she wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But ill the first was dyed, and faded sore.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-326" id="noteref-326" epub:type="noteref">326</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In dress succinct Marphisa sate; in plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such as beseemed a warrior and a maid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thermodöon haply witnessed Hippolyte</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her fair squadron in like garb arrayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afield already, in his livery dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agramant’s herald made proclaim, and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“It was forbid to all men, far and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In act or word, with either part to side.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The frequent crowd expects the double foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And often, in impatience, they complain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And call those famous cavaliers too slow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When from the Tartar’s tent an angry strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is heard, and cries which multiply; sir, know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It was the martial king of Sericane,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-327" id="noteref-327" epub:type="noteref">327</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And puissant Tartar, who that question stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made the mighty tumult which has heard.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sericane’s monarch, having with his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Equipt the king of Tartary all o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approached to gird him with that sovereign brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With which Orlando went adorned of yore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When “<em>Durindana</em>” on the hilt he scanned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Graved with the quartering that Almontes wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which from that wretched man, beside a font,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Youthful Orlando reft in Aspramont.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He, seeing this, agnised it for the blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So famous, which Anglantes’ warrior bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For which he had the fairest fleet arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which ever put to sea from eastern shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had Castille’s rich kingdom overlaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And conquered fruitful France some years before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But cannot now imagine how that sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is in possession of the Tartar lord;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And asks, “had he by force or treaty won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when and where and how, that faulchion bright;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Mandricardo said that “he had done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fierce battle for that sword with Brava’s knight;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-328" id="noteref-328" epub:type="noteref">328</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who feigned himself of sober sense foregone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hoping that so he should conceal his fright:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—‘For I on him would ceaseless war have made,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(He added,) ‘while he kept the goodly blade.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Saying, “The Count, in yielding to his foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That sword, the Beavers’ known device had tried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, followed closely by the hunter, know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their fell pursuer covets nought beside.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere he had heard him out⁠—“Nor I forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That sword to thee nor any one,” (replied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso, fierce,) “well earned by me, at cost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of treasure, and of pain, and people lost.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Some other faulchion for thyself purvey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This will I have; nor deem my reasons new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whether Orlando wise or foolish stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I make it mine where’er it meets my view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With none to witness, thou, beside the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Usurped that sword; I claim it as my due:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this my scimeter shall reasons yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And we will try the cause in listed field.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Prepare to win the sword before thou rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That goodly blade against King Rodomont.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To win his arms is use of cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before his foe in duel he affront.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“No sweeter music ever soothes my ear”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Replied the Tartar, as he raised his front)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Than voice which champions me to martial field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But see that his consent the Sarzan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-329" id="noteref-329" epub:type="noteref">329</a> yield.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Be thou the first; and, next on listed ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let Sarza’s valiant lord the question try;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor doubt but I in readiness be found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To thee and every other to reply.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“⁠—Thou shalt not so the ordered lots confound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or break our compact (was Rogero’s cry):</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Either, first Rodomont shall take the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or shall to me his right of battle yield.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It that be true Gradasso has averred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That knight should win the arms he would assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou hast no title to my white-winged bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save this from me thou first shalt bear away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But since, forsooth, whilere I said the word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I will not what I once pronounced unsay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That mine shall be the second battle, so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Argier’s monarch first affront his foe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I will confuse the order of the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout, if partially confused by thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abandon will I not my blazoned shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless thou combat for it now with me.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Were one and the other Mars, for battle steeled,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Replies enraged, the king of Tartary)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Nor one nor the other’s might should make me waive</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My title to that shield and goodly glaive;”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And overmastered by his choler, flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a clenched fist at him of Sericane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And smites him with his right-hand in such wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As makes him quit his hold of Durindane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso bold was taken by surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not deeming him so furious and insane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, while he looked not to the Tartar lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Found himself robbed of good Orlando’s sword.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fury and scorn Gradasso’s visage heats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which seems to flash with fire, at that disgrace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with more rage and pain his bosom beats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that ’twas offered in such public place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To draw his scimeter, the king retreats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Intent upon revenge, some little space.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So Mandricardo on himself relies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero he to fight, as well defies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Come on in arms against me, both combined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be King Rodomont the third!” (he said)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Come Spain and Afric and all human kind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ne’er will I turn.” And he, at nought dismayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So saying, in his fury, sawed the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About him, with Almontes’ noble blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embraced his shield, and, full of choler, stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against Gradasso and Rogero good.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Leave <em>me</em> the care,” the fierce Gradasso cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“The frenzy of this madman to subdue.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Not so, by Heaven!” Rogero wroth replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“For I this field claim justly as my due.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Stand back!” and “stand <em>thou</em> back!” on either side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They shout; yet neither of the twain withdrew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus among those three began a feud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thence some strange result would have ensued,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If many had not interposed, and sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With little wit their fury to restrain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who had well-nigh too dear the experience bought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of saving others at their proper pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor to accord the world had ever brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those knights, but that the worthy king of Spain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-330" id="noteref-330" epub:type="noteref">330</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came thither with renowned Troyano’s heir;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-331" id="noteref-331" epub:type="noteref">331</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Awed by whose sovereign presence all forbear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Agramant those contending warriors made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cause of their so burning strife display;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next earnestly bestirred himself, and prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso that he would, in courteous way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Concede the Trojan Hector’s goodly blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Mandricardo, solely for that day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until the cruel fight was at an end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein he should with Rodomont contend.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While royal Agramant would peace restore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now with this and now with that conferred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the other tent, between the Sarzan Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Sacripant, another strife was heard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Valiant King Sacripant (as said before)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To equip Sir Rodomont himself bestirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he and Ferraù had that champion drest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his forefather Nimrod’s iron vest;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And there had they arrived, where with his spume</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The horse was making his rich bridle white:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I of the good Frontino speak, for whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero urged with yet unfelt despite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Sacripant, who plays the part of groom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And has to bring afield the Sarzan knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marks narrowly the courser’s gear and shoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sell and furniture throughout reviews;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And as his points and nimble parts, more near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, in this view, observes with better heed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The youthful king, beyond all doubt, is clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sees his Frontilatte in that steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him he of old had held so passing dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whilom of such debates the fruitful seed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for whose loss, whilere he was so woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He evermore on foot resolved to go.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This from beneath him had Brunello<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-332" id="noteref-332" epub:type="noteref">332</a> borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before Albracca, on the very day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angelica’s rare ring, and Roland’s horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Balisarda he conveyed away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With fierce Marphisa’s blade⁠—and on return</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Afric⁠—to Rogero, from his prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gave Balisarda and the courser, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was by the Child Frontino named anew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Assured ’twas no mistake, Circassia’s chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turned him about to Rodomont, and cried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Reft from me in Albracca, by a thief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This horse is mine; which might be certified</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By them whose words would warrant well belief:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But as my witnesses are distant wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If it be questioned, I will make it plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And will, with sword in hand, the truth maintain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yet am I well contented, for that we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have for these some few days together gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To lend him for to-day; since well I see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That not without him could the fight be done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But on condition, that the courser be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Acknowledged mine, and furnished as a loan:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Otherwise hope not for that horse, save first</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Me, on this quarrel, thou in combat worst.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The furious king of Argier, that in pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surpassed all knights that ever girt the sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose paragon, for heart and prowess tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meseems no ancient histories record,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cried; “Sacripant, if any one beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thyself, to me should utter such a word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He should deem quickly, from its bitter fruit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from his birth would better have been mute.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But, for that fellowship in which we went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As thou hast said) together, I to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such patience and forbearance am content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As warning thee, thy purpose to forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until thou shalt have witnessed the event</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of strife between me and my Tartar foe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When him I such example hope to make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou shalt humbly say, ‘The courser take.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fierce and enraged, replied Circassia’s peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“To play the churl with thee is courteous deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I to thee repeat more plain and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou ill wouldst aught design against that steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, while I an avenging sabre rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This I prohibit thee, and, should it need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every better means of battle fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With thee for this would battle, tooth and nail.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They from dispute proceed to ribaldry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From words to blows; and through their mickle ire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fierce battle was inflamed, and blazed more high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than ever lightly-kindled straw took fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Rodomont is steeled in panoply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sacripant neither plate nor mail attire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet so in fence is skilled that nimble lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He seems all over sheltered by his sword.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No greater were the daring and the might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Though infinite) which Rodomont displayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than the precaution and the nimble sleight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the Circassian summoned to his aid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No mill-wheel ever turns with swifter flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The circling stone by which the grain is brayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Sacripant at need moves foot or hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shifts now here, now there his restless stand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Serpentine and Ferraù interfere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They with drawn swords the twain asunder bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With them Grandonio was and Isolier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many other leaders of the Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This was the tumult which was heard whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the other tent, what time they laboured sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero vainly to a peace to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Tartary’s and Sericana’s king.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This while some voice to Agramant the news</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reports aright, that Ulien’s might seed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-333" id="noteref-333" epub:type="noteref">333</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Sacripant, Circassia’s king, pursues</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fierce and furious quarrel for the steed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agramant, whom so many jars confuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaims to King Marsilius; “Take thou heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That no worse evil mid these knights betide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While for this new disorder I provide.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rodomont reined his anger, and retired</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some deal, at his approaching sovereign’s view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor less respect in Sacripant inspired</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moorish monarch; of the furious two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with grave voice and royal mien inquired</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What cause of strife such deadly discord blew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having searched their quarrel to the root,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would fain accord them; but with little fruit.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Circassia’s monarch would not, on his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Longer his horse to Argier’s lord allow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save humbly Rodomont to him applied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That steed for this occasion to bestow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him Sir Rodomont, with wonted pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returned for answer: “Neither Heaven nor thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall make me recognize as gift or loan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What I with this good hand can make mine own.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The king bade Sacripant explain his right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how that horse was taken from him sought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this from first to last Circassia’s knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rehearsed, and reddened as the tale he taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Relating to the king the robber’s sleight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Who had surprised him overwhelmed with thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon four spears his courser’s saddle stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from beneath the naked horse conveyed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Marphisa, whom these cries, mid others, bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When of the robbery of the horse advised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In visage is disturbed, remembering</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How on that day her faulchion was surprised;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when that courser (which equipt with wing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared when flying her) she recognized;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And recognized as well⁠—at first unknown⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The valiant king who filled Circassia’s throne.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The others who stood round her, wont to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brunello often boast of the deceit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Gan turn towards that wretch, and made appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By open signs they knew him for the Cheat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marphisa who the subtle knave whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suspected as the author of that feat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now questions this, now that, who all accord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In saying “ ’twas Brunello stole her sword;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Who, well deserving as a fitting pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To dangle from the gallows-tree in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Agramant the crown of Tingitane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(An ill example) was preferred to wear.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This fires anew Marphisa’s old disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor she from instant vengeance will forbear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this, as well as other shame and scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She on her road had from that caitiff born.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A squire laced on her helmet, at her hest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She wore the remnant of her armour sheen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor without martial cuirass on her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Find I, that she ten times was ever seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even from the day when first that iron vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Braced on her limbs the passing-valiant queen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With helm on head, where, mid the highest rows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brunello sits among the first, she goes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Him by mid breast Marphisa griped amain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lifted up the losel from the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As is rapacious eagle wont to strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pullet, in her talons circled round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bore him where the sons of King Troyane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heard the two knights their jarring claims propound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He who perceives himself in evil hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye weeps, and mercy of that maid demands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Above the universal noise and shout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which rose nigh equally on either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brunello, who from all the crowd about</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For pity now, and now for succour, cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So loud was heard, that of that ample rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He gathered round himself the pressing tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Arrived before the Moorish army’s head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him with haughty mien Marphisa said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This thief, (said she) thy vassal, will I slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with this hand of mine will knot the cord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About his neck; because the very day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He stole <em>his</em> courser, he purloined <em>my</em> sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But is there any one who deems I say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amiss, let him stand forth and speak the word;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I on him will prove, before thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I have done right, and who gainsays me, lies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But because haply some one may pretend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I have till such a time of strife delayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My vengeance, when such famous knights contend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For three days shall the wretch’s doom be stayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the mean time let him who would defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That caitiff, come himself, or send him aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For afterwards, if none the deed prevent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His carcass shall a thousand birds content.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I hence to yonder tower, which distant nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Three leagues, o’erlooks a little copse, repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with one varlet in my company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with one waiting-maid; if any dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rescue the thief, let him come thither; I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wait the approach of his defenders there.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus she; and thither quickly wends her ways</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither was said, nor any answer stays.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Held on the pommel grappled by his hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brunello on Marphisa’s courser lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The caitiff weeps, and shrieking in despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On all in whom he hopes, for succour cries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In such confusion is Troyano’s heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sees no way through these perplexities;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, that Marphisa thence Brunello bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In such a guise, yet grieved the monarch more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not that he loved the losel or esteemed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather to him some time had borne despite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And often had to hand the caitiff schemed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since he had forfeited the ring of might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But here his honour touched the monarch deemed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that his visage reddened at the slight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He would, in person, follow her at speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to his utmost power avenge the deed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the wise king, Sobrino, who was by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him from the quest endeavoured to dissuade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And “that with his exalted majesty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such enterprize were ill assorted,” said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Although firm hope, nay full security,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had to overcome that martial maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he with pain subdued a woman, shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather than honour, would pursue his name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Small profit and much peril would succeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From any fight he should with her maintain,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(And he advised him) “as the better deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To leave that wretched caitiff to his pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And albeit but a simple nod should need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To free him, from that nod he should refrain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that the monarch would do ill to force</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even-handed Justice from her destined course.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou to the fierce Marphisa may’st apply</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To leave his trial (he pursued) to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With promise, her in this to satisfy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to suspend him from the gallows-tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And even should the maid thy prayer deny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let her in every wish contented be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rather than that she desert thy side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let her hang him and every thief beside.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Right willingly King Agramant gave way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To King Sobrino’s counsel sage and staid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let renowned Marphisa wend her way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor scathed he, nor let scathe, that martial maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Neither endured that any her should pray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And heaven knows with what courage he obeyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That wise advice, to calm such ruder strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And quarrel, as throughout his camp were rife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At this mad Discord laughed, no more in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That any truce or treaty should ensue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scowered the place of combat there and here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor could stand still, for pleasure at the view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pride gamboled and rejoiced with her compeer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the fire fresh food and fuel threw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shouted so that Michael in the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knew the glad sign of conquest in that cry.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Paris-town rocked, and turbid ran the flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Seine at that loud voice, that horrid roar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, so it echo rang in Arden’s wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beasts left their caverns in that forest hoar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alp and Cevenne’s mountain-solitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Blois, and Arles, and Rouen’s distant shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rhine, Rhone, and Saône, and Garonne, heard the pest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scared mothers hugged their children to their breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Five have set up their rest, resolved to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first their different quarrels to conclude:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tangled so is one with other plea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ill Apollo’s self could judge the feud.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-334" id="noteref-334" epub:type="noteref">334</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To unravel that first cause of enmity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king began⁠—the strife which had ensued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because of beauteous Doralice, between</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king of Scythia<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-335" id="noteref-335" epub:type="noteref">335</a> and her Algerine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>King Agramant oft moved, between the pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now here now there, to bring them to accord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now there now here, admonishing that pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like faithful brother and like righteous lord:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when he found that neither would forbear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deaf and rebellious to his royal word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor would consent that lady to forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The cause of strife, in favour of his foe,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As his best lore, at length the monarch said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to obey his sentence both were fain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That he who was by her preferred, should wed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauteous daughter of King Stordilane:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that what was established on his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should not be changed, to either’s loss or gain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The compromise was liked on either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since either hoped she would for him decide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The mighty king of Sarza, who long space</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the Tartar, had loved Doralice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Who had preferred that sovereign to such grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As modest lady may, nor do amiss)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believed, when she past sentence on the case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She must pronounce what would ensure his bliss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor thus alone King Rodomont conceived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all the Moorish host with him believed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All know what exploits wrought by him had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For her in joust and war; they all unsound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And weak King Mandricardo’s judgment ween;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he, who oft was with her on their round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oftener private with the youthful queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time the tell-tale sun was under ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, knowing well how sure he was to speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laughed at the silly rabble’s idle creed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They, after, ratify the king’s award,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between his hands, and next the suitors twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before that damsel go, that on the sward</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fixing her downcast eyes, in modest vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Avows her preference of the Tartar lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At which sore wondering stand the paynim train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Rodomont remains so sore astound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He cannot raise his visage from the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But wonted anger chasing shame which dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Sarzan’s face all over, he arraigned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel’s sentence, of the faulchion, tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About his manly waist, the handle strained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the king’s and others’ hearing cried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“By this the question shall be lost or gained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not by faithless woman’s fickle thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which thither still inclines, where least it ought.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Kind Mandricardo on his feet once more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaims, “And be it as it pleases thee.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that ere yet the vessel made the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unploughed remained a mighty space of sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that this king reproved the Sarzan sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ruling, “that to appeal upon that plea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more with Mandricardo could avail,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made the moody Sarzan strike his sail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Branded with double scorn, before those peers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By noble Agramant, whose sovereign sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, as in loyal duty bound, reveres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by his lady on the selfsame day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There will no more the monarch of Algiers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abide, but of his band⁠—a large array⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two serjeants only for his service takes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with that pair the paynim camp forsakes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As the afflicted bull who has foregone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His heifer, nor can longer warfare wage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeks out the greenwood-holt and stream most lone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or sands at distance from his pasturage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There ceases not, in sun or shade to moan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet not for that exhales his amorous rage:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So parts, constrained his lady to forego,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king of Argier, overwhelmed with woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rogero moved, his courser to regain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had already donned his warlike gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then recollecting, that on listed plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At Mandricardo he must couch the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Followed not Rodomont, but turned his rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To end his quarrel with the Tartar, ere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He met in combat Sericana’s lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within close barriers, for Orlando’s sword.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To have Frontino ravished in his sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And be unable to forbid the deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sorely grieves; but, when he shall that fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have done, resolves he will regain the steed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Sacripant, whom, like the youthful knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No quarrels in the Moor’s pursuit impede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who was unengaged in other quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the Sarzan’s footsteps quickly prest;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And would have quickly joined him that was gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for the chance of an adventure rare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which him detained until the day was done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made him lose the track of Ulien’s heir:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A woman who had fallen into the Saône,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who without his help had perished there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warrior drowning in that water found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stemmed the stream and dragged the dame aground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When afterwards he would remount the sell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From him his restless charger broke astray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who fled before his lord till evening fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor lightly did the king that courser stay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At last he caught him; but no more could spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he had wandered from the beaten way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two hundred miles he roved, ’twixt hill and plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere he came up with Rodomont again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How he by Sacripant was overtaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fought by him, to his discomfit sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how he lost his courser, how was taken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say not now, who have to say before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With what disdain and with what anger shaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against his liege and love, the Sarzan Moor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forth from the Saracen cantonments sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what he of the one and other said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wherever that afflicted paynim goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fills the kindling air with sighs that burn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Echo oft, for pity of his woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him from hollow rock is heard to mourn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“O female mind! how lightly ebbs and flows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your fickle mood,” (he cries,) “aye prone to turn!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Object most opposite to kindly faith!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lost, wretched man, who trusts you to his scathe!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Neither my love nor length of servitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though by a thousand proofs to you made clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had power even so to fix your faithless mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That you at least so lightly should not veer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor am I quitted, because less endued</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With worth than Mandricardo I appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor for your conduct cause can I declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save this alone, that you a woman are.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I think that nature and an angry God</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Produced thee to the world, thou wicked sex,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To be to man a plague, a chastening rod;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Happy, wert thou not present to perplex.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So serpent creeps along the grassy sod;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So bear and ravening wolf the forest vex;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wasp, fly, and gad-fly buzz in liquid air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the rich grain lies tangled with the tare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why has not bounteous Nature willed that man</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should be produced without the aid of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As we the pippin, pear, and service can</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Engraft by art on one another’s tree?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But she directs not all by certain plan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather, upon a nearer view, I see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In naming her, she ill can act aright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since Nature is herself a female hight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yet be not therefore proud and full of scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Women, because man issues from your seed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For roses also blossom on the thorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the fair lily springs from loathsome weed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Despiteous, proud, importunate, and lorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of love, of faith, of counsel, rash in deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that, ungrateful, cruel and perverse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And born to be the world’s eternal curse!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These plaints and countless others to the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poured forth the paynim knight, to fury stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now easing in low tone his troubled mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now in sounds which were at distance heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In shame and in reproach of womankind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet certes he from sober reason erred:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For we may deem a hundred good abound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where one or two perchance are evil found.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Though none for whom I hitherto have sighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Of those so many⁠—have kept faith with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All with ingratitude, or falsehood dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I deem not, I accuse my destiny.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many there are, and have been more beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unmeriting reproach: but if there be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid hundreds, one or two of evil way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My fortune wills that I should be their prey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet will I make such search before I die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rather before my hair shall wax more white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That haply on some future day, even I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall say, “That one has kept her promise plight.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And should not the event my trust belie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Nor am I hopeless) I with all my might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will with unwearied pain her praise rehearse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With pen and ink and voice, in prose and verse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Saracen, whom rage no less profound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against his sovereign lord than lady swayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And who of reason thus o’erpast the bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ill of one and of the other said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would fain behold that monarch’s kingdom drowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With such a tempest, with such scathe o’erlaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As should in Afric every house aggrieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor one stone standing on another leave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And would that from his realm, in want and woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Agramant a mendicant should wend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That through his means the monarch, brought thus low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His fathers’ ancient seat might reascend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thus he might the fruit of fealty show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make his sovereign see, a real friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was aye to be preferred in wrong or right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although the world against him should unite;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the Saracen pours forth his moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With rage against his liege and love possest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on his way is by long journeys gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Giving himself and courser little rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The following day or next, upon the Saône</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He finds himself, who has his course addrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards the coast of Provence, with design</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his African domain to cross the brine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From bank to bank the stream was covered o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With boat of little burden, which conveyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the supply of the invading Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Victual, from many places round purveyed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since even from Paris to the pleasant shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Acquamorta, all his rule obeyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And⁠—fronting Spain⁠—whate’er of level land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was seen, extending on the better hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The victual, disembarked from loaded barge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was laid on sumpter-horse or ready wain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sent, with escort to protect the charge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where barges could not come; about the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fat herds were feeding on the double marge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brought thither from the march of either reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, by the river-side, at close of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In different homesteads lodged, the drovers lay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The king of Argier, (for the dusky air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of night began upon the world to close)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here listened to a village-landlord’s prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in his inn besought him to repose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—His courser stalled⁠—the board with plenteous fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is heaped, and Corsic wine and Grecian flows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, in all else a Moor, the Sarzan drank</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the forbidden vintage like a Frank.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To warlike Rodomont, with goodly cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And kindlier mien, the landlord honour paid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he the port of an illustrious peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his guest’s lofty presence saw portrayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, sore beside himself, the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had scarce his heart within him, which had strayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To her⁠—whilere his own⁠—in his despite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor word escaped the melancholy knight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Mine host, most diligent in his vocation</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all the trade who throughout France were known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(In that he had, ’mid strange and hostile nation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every chance of warfare, kept his own)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Prompt to assist him in his occupation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some of his kin had called; whereof was none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who dared before the warrior speak of aught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing that paynim mute and lost in thought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From thought to thought the Sarzan’s fancy flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself removed from thence a mighty space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who sits so bent, and with such downcast eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He never once looks any in the face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next, after silence long, and many sighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if deep slumber had but then given place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His spirits he recalls, his eyelids raises,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the family and landlord gazes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then silence broke, and with a milder air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And visage somewhat less disturbed, applied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him, the host, and those by-standers there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To know, “if any to a wife were tied;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And landlord and attendants⁠—“that all were,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Sarza’s moody cavalier replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He asked, “what each conceited of his spouse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if he deemed her faithful to her vows,”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Except mine host, those others were agreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That chaste and good their consorts they believed.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—“Think each man as he will, but well I read,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(The landlord said,) “You fondly are deceived:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your rash replies to one conclusion lead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That you are all of common sense bereaved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so too must believe this noble knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unless he would persuade us black is white.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Because, as single is that precious bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The phoenix, and on earth there is but one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, in this ample world, it is averred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One only can a woman’s treason shun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each hopes alike to be that wight preferred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The victor who that single palm has won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—How is it possible that what can fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To one alone, should be the lot of all?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Erewhile I made the same mistake as you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that more dames than one were virtuous thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until a gentleman of Venice, who,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For my good fortune, to this inn was brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My ignorance by his examples true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So ably schooled, he better wisdom taught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Valerio was the name that stranger bore;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-336" id="noteref-336" epub:type="noteref">336</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A name I shall remember evermore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Of wives and mistresses the treachery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was known to him, with all their cunning lore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He, both from old and modern history,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from his own, was ready with such store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As plainly showed that none to modesty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could make pretension, whether rich or poor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that, if one appeared of purer strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas that she better hid her wanton vein.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He of his many tales, among the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Whereof a third is from my memory gone)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So well one story in my head imprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It could not be more firmly graved in stone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what I thought and think, would be professed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For that ill sex, I ween by every one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who heard; and, Sir⁠—if pleased to lend an ear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To their confusion yon that tale shall hear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What could’st thou offer which could better please</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At present” (made reply the paynim knight)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Than sample, chosen from thine histories,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which hits the opinion that I hold, aright?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I may hear thee speak with better ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sit so, that I may have thee in my sight.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But in the following canto I unfold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What to King Rodomont the landlord told.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
