<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-22" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</span>
				</h2>
				<!--ARGUMENT-->
				<p>
					<span>Atlantes' magic towers Astolpho wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Destroys, and frees his thralls from prison-cell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bradamant finds Rogero, who in fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O'erthrows four barons from the warlike sell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When on their way to save an errant knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doomed to devouring fire: the four who fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For impious Pinnabel maintained the strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom, after, Bradamant deprives of life.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>Ye courteous dames, and to your lovers dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You that are with one single love content;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though, 'mid so many and many, it is clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Right few of you are of such constant bent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be not displeased at what I said whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When I so bitterly Gabrina shent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor if I yet expend some other verse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In censure of the beldam's mind perverse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Such was she; and I hide not what is true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So was enjoined me for a task by one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose will is law; therefore is honour due</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To constant heart throughout my story done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He who betrayed his master to the Jew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thirty pence, nor Peter wronged, nor John,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor less renowned is Hypermnestra's fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For her so many wicked sisters' shame.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>For one I dare to censure in my lays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For so the story wills which I recite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the other hand, a hundred will I praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make their virtue dim the sun's fair light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But turning to the various pile I raise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Gramercy! dear to many) of the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Scotland I was telling, who hard-by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had heard, as was rehearsed, a piercing cry.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>He entered, 'twixt two hills, a narrow way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From whence was heard the cry; nor far had hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ere to a vale he came shut out from day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he before him a dead knight espied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who I shall tell; but first I must away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From France, in the Levant to wander wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till I the paladin Astolpho find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who westward had his course from thence inclined.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>I in the cruel city left the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence, with the formidable bugle's roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had chased the unfaithful people in their fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And has preserved himself from peril sore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the sound had made his comrades rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then sail, and fly with noted scorn that shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now following him, I say, the warrior took</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Armenian road, and so that land forsook.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>He, after some few days, in Natoly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Finds himself, and towards Brusa goes his ways;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence wending, on the hither side o' the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes Thrace; through Hungary by the Danube lays</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His course, and as his horse had wings to flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Traverses in less time than twenty days</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both the Moravian and Bohemian line;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Threaded Franconia next, and crost the Rhine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>To Aix-la-Chapelle thence, through Arden's wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came and embarked upon the Flemish strand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sea, with southern breeze his vessel stood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, so the favouring wind her canvas fanned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he, at little distance, Albion viewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By noon, and disembarked upon her land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He backed his horse, and so the rowels plied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In London he arrived by even-tide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Here, learning afterwards that Otho old</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has lain for many months in Paris-town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that anew nigh every baron bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has after his renowned example done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He straightway does for France his sails unfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the mouth of Thames again is gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence issuing forth, with all his canvas spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Calais he directs the galley's head.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>A breeze which, from the starboard blowing light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had tempted forth Astolpho's bark to sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By little and by little, waxed in might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so at last obtains the mastery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pilot is constrained to veer outright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest by the billows swampt his frigate be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, departing from his first design,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Keeps the bark straight before the cresting brine.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>Now to the right, now to the other hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sped by the tempest, through the foaming main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vessel ran; she took the happy land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At last nigh Rouen; and forthwith, in chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And plate Astolpho cased, and girt with brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bade put the saddle upon Rabicane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Departed thence, and (what availed him more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than thousands armed) with him his bugle bore;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>And traversing a forest, at the feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a fair hill, arrived beside a font,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time the sheep foregoes his grassy meat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Penned in the cabin or the hollow mount;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, overcome by feverish thirst and heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lifted the weighty morion from his front;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tethered his courser in the thickest wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with intent to drink, approached the flood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>His lips he had not wetted in its bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before a youthful rustic, ambushed near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sprang from a copse, backed Rabican, and fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the good courser of the cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astolpho hears the noise and lifts his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, when he sees his mighty loss so clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Satiate, although he had not drunk, upstarts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And after the young churl in fury darts.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>That robber did not let the courser strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At speed, or he had from the warrior shot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But loosening now and tightening now the rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fled at a gallop or a steady trot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the deep forest issued forth the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After long round, and reached in fine the spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where so many illustrious lords were shent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Worse prisoners they than if in prison pent!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>On Rabican, who with the wind might race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The villain sped, within the enchanter's won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impeded by his shield and iron case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Parforce Astolpho far behind him run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet there arrives as well, but every trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of what the warrior had pursued is gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He neither Rabican nor thief can meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vainly rolls his eyes and plies his feet.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>He plies his feet, and searches still in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throughout the house, hall, bower, or galleried rows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet labours evermore, with fruitless pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And care, to find the treacherous churl; nor knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where he can have secreted Rabicane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who every other animal outgoes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vainly searches all day the dome about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above, below, within it, and without.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>He, wearied and confused with wandering wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perceived the place was by enchantment wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the book he carried at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Logistilla given in India, thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bestowed, should new enchantment him betide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That needful succour might therein be sought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He to the index turns, and quickly sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What pages show the proper remedies.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>I' the book, of that enchanted house at large</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was written, and in this was taught the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To foil the enchanter, and to set at large</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The different prisoners, subject to his sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of these illusions and these frauds in charge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A spirit pent beneath the threshold lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the stone raised which kept him fast below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him the palace into smoke would go.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Astolpho with desire to bring to end</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An enterprise so passing fair, delays</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more, but to the task his force does bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prove how much the heavy marble weighs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As old Atlantes sees the knight intend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bring to scorn his art and evil ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suspicious of the ill which may ensue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He moves to assail him with enchantments new.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>He, with his spells and shapes of devilish kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes the duke different from his wont appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To one a giant, and to one a hind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To other an ill-visaged cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each, in the form which in the thicket blind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The false enchanter wore, beholds the peer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that they all, with purpose to have back</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What the magician took, the duke attack.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>The Child, Gradasso, Iroldo, Bradamant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Prasildo, Brandimart, and many more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All, cheated by this new illusion, pant</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To slay the English baron, angered sore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But he abased their pride and haughty vaunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who straight bethought him of the horn be bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for the succour of its echo dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They, without fail, had laid Astolpho dead.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>But he no sooner has the bugle wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And poured a horrid larum, than in guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of pigeons at the musquet's scaring sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The troop of cavaliers affrighted flies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less the necromancer starts astound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No less he from his den in panic hies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Troubled and pale, and hurrying evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till out of hearing of the horrid roar</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>The warder fled; with him his prisoned train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many steeds as well are fled and gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(These more than rope is needed to restrain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who after their astounded masters run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scared by the sound; nor cat nor mouse remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who seem to hear in it, "Lay on, lay on."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rabican with the rest had broke his bands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that he fell into Astolpho's hands.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He, having chased the enchanter Moor away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upraised the heavy threshold from the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath which, figures and more matters lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I omit; desirous to confound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The spell which did the magic dome upstay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The duke made havock of whate'er he found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As him the book he carried taught to do:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And into mist and smoke all past from view.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>There he found fastened by a golden chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero's famous courser, him I say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Given by the wizard, that to the domain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of false Alcina him he might convey:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On which, equipt with Logistilla's rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To France Rogero had retraced his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And had from Ind to England rounded all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The right-hand side of the terrestrial ball.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>I know not if you recollect how tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a tree Rogero left his rein, the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Galaphron's naked daughter from his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vanished, and him did with that scorn appay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The courser, to his wonder who espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Returned to him whom he was used to obey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the old enchanter's care to dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stayed with him till broken was the spell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>At nought Astolpho could more joyous be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than this; of all things fortunate the best:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that the hippogryph so happily</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Offered himself; that he might scower the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As much he coveted) of land and sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in few days the ample world invest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him well he knew, how fit for his behoof;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For of his feats he had elsewhere made proof.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Him he that day in India proved, when sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He was by sage Melissa, from the reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that ill woman who him, sore bested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had changed from man to myrtle on the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had marked and noted how his giddy head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was formed by Logistilla to the rein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And saw how well instructed by her care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero was, to guide him every where.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Minded to take the hippogryph, he flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The saddle on him, which lay near, and bitted</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The steed, by choosing, all the reins among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This part or that, until his mouth was fitted:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For in that place were many bridles hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Belonging to the coursers which flitted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now alone, intent upon his flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thought of Rabicane detained the knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Good cause he had to love that Rabicane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For better horse was not to run with lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And him had he from the remotest reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of India ridden even into France:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After much thought, he to some friend would fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Present him, rather than so, left to chance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Abandon there the courser, as a prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the first stranger who should pass that way.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>He stood upon the watch if he could view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some hunter in the forest, or some hind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom he might commit the charge, and who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might to some city lead the horse behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He waited all that day and till the new</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had dawned, when, while the twilight yet was blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thought he saw, as he expecting stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cavalier approaching through the wood.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>But it behoves that, ere the rest I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I Bradamant and good Rogero find.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">After the horn had ceased, and, far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The beauteous pair had left the dome behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero looked, and knew what till that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He had seen not, by Atlantes rendered blind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Atlantes had effected by his power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They should not know each other till that hour.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero looks on Bradamant, and she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Looks on Rogero in profound surprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That for so many days that witchery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had so obscurred her altered mind and eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rejoiced, Rogero clasps his lady free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crimsoning with deeper than the rose's dyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his fair love's first blossoms, while he clips</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gentle damsel, gathers from her lips.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>A thousand times they their embrace renew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And closely each is by the other prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While so delighted are those lovers two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their joys are ill contained within their breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deluded by enchantments, much they rue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That while they were within the wizard's rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They should not e'er have one another known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And have so many happy days foregone.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The gentle Bradamant, who was i' the vein</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To grant whatever prudent virgin might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To solace her desiring lover's pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that her honour should receive no slight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— If the last fruits he of her love would gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor find her ever stubborn, bade the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her of Duke Aymon through fair mean demand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But be baptized before he claimed her hand.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero good, who not alone to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A Christian for the love of her were fain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As his good sire had been, and anciently</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His grandsire and his whole illustrious strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for her pleasure would immediately</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resign whatever did of life remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Says, "I not only, if 'tis thy desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will be baptized by water, but by fire."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Then on his way to be baptized he hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he might next espouse the martial may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Bradamant; who served him as a guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Vallombrosa's fane, an abbey gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rich, fair, nor less religious, and beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Courteous to whosoever passed that way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And they encountered, issuing from the chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A woman, with a passing woful face.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero, as still courteous, still humane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To all, but woman most, when he discerned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her dainty visage furrowed by a rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of lovely tears, sore pitied her, and burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the desire to know her grievous pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And having to the mournful lady turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Besought her, after fair salute, to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What cause had made her eyes thus overflow.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And she, uplifting their moist rays and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Most kindly to the inquiring Child replied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the cause of her unhappy plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him, since he sought it, fully satisfied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Thou hast to understand, O gentle knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My visage is so bathed with tears," she cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"In pity to a youth condemned to die</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This very day, within a town hard by.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Loving a gentle lady and a gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The daughter of Marsilius, king of Spain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And feigning, veiled in feminine array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The modest roll of eye and girlish strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With her each night the amorous stripling lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor any had suspicion of the twain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But nought so hidden is, but searching eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the long run the secret will espy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>"One first perceived it, and then spoke with two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those two with more, till to the king 'twas said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of whom but yesterday a follower true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gave order to surprise the pair in bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the citadel the prisoners new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To separate dungeons in that fortress led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor think I that enough of day remains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To save the lover from his cruel pains.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>"I fled, not to behold such cruelty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For they alive the wretched youth will burn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor think I aught could more afflicting be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than such fair stripling's torment to discern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or that hereafter thing can pleasure me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So much, but that it will to trouble turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If memory retrace the cruel flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which preyed upon his fair and dainty frame."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>Touched deeply, Bradamant his danger hears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In heart sore troubled at the story shown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As anxious for the lover, it appears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if he were a brother of her own:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor certes wholly causeless are her fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As in an after verse will be made known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, to Rogero: "Him to keep from harms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meseems we worthily should turn our arms."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>And to that melancholy damsel said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Place us but once within the walls, and I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that the youth be not already dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will be your warrant that he shall not die."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero, who the kindly bosom read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Bradamant, still full of piety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Felt himself but all over with desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To snatch the unhappy stripling from the fire.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And to the maid, whose troubled face apears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bathed with a briny flood, "Why wait we? — need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is here of speedy succour, not of tears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do you but where the youth is prisoned lead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him from a thousand swords, a thousand spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We vow to save; so it be done with speed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But haste you, lest too tardy be our aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he be burnt, which succour is delayed."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>The haughty semblance and the lofty say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of these, who with such wondrous daring glowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hope, which long had ceased to be her stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again upon the grieving dame bestowed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, for she less the distance of the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dreaded, than interruption of the road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest they, through this, should take that path in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel stood suspended and in pain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Then said: "If to the place our journey lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the highroad, which is both straight and plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That we in time might reach it, I should say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the fire was lit; but we must strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By path so foul and crooked, that a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To reach the city would suffice with pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when, alas! we thither shall have sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I fear that we shall find the stripling dead."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"And wherefore take we not the way most near?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero answers; and the dame replies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Because fast by where we our course should steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A castle of the Count of Poictiers lies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Pinnabel for dame and cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did, three days past, a shameful law devise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than whom more worthless living wight is none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Count Anselmo d'Altaripa's son.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"No cavalier or lady by that rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without some noted scorn and injury goes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both of their coursers here are dispossest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knight his arms and dame her gown foregoes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No better cavaliers lay lance in rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor have for years in France against their foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than four, who for Sir Pinnabel have plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their promise to maintain the castle's right.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"Whence first arose the usage, which began</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But three days since, you now, sir knight, shall hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shall the cause, if right or evil, scan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which moved the banded cavaliers to swear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So ill a lady has the Castellan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So wayward, that she is without a peer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, on a day, as with the count she went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know not whither, by a knight was shent.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>"This knight, as flouted by that bonnibel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For carrying on his croup an ancient dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Encountered with her champion Pinnabel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of overweening pride and little fame:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him he o'erturned, made alight as well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And put her to the proof, if sound or lame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Left her on foot, and had that woman old</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the dismounted damsel's garment stoled.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>"She, who remained on foot, in fell despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Greedy of vengeance, and athirst for ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leagued with the faithless Pinnabel, a wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All evil prompt to further and fulfil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Says she shall never rest by day nor night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever know a happy hour, until</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand knights and dames are dispossest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of courser, and of armour, and of vest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Four puissant knights arrived that very day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It happened, at a place of his, and who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had all of them from regions far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come lately to those parts: so many true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And valiant warriors, skilled in martial play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our age has seen not. These the goodly crew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guido the savage, but a stripling yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gryphon, and Aquilant, and Sansonet!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Them at the fortilage, of which I told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Pinnabel received with semblance fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next seized the ensuing night the warriors bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In bed, nor loosed, till he had made them swear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That (he such period fixt) they in his hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should be his faithful champions for a year</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And month; and of his horse and arms deprive</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whatever cavalier should there arrive.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>"And any damsel whom the stranger bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With him, dismount, and strip her of her vest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, thus surprised, the warlike prisoners swore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So were constrained to observe the cruel hest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though grieved and troubled: nor against the four,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seems, can any joust, but vails his crest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knight infinite have come, but one and all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afoot and without arms have left that Hall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>"Their order is, who from the castle hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first by lot, shall meet the foe alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But if he find a champion of such guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As keeps the sell, while he himself is thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest must undertake the enterprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even to the death, against that single one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ranged in a band. If such each single knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Imagine the assembled warriors' might!</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>"Nor stands it with our haste, which all delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All let forbids, that you beside that tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be forced to stop and mingle in the fray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For grant that you be conquerors in the stower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(And as your presence warrants well, you may,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Tis not a thing concluded in an hour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if all day he wait our succour, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much fear the stripling in the fire will die."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Regard we not this hindrance of our quest,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero cried, "But do we what we may!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let HIM who rules the heavens ordain the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Fortune, if he leave it in her sway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To you shall by this joust be manifest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If we can aid the youth; for whom to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They on a ground so causeless and so slight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As you to us rehearsed, the fire will light."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero ceased; and in the nearest way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The damsel put the pair without reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor these beyond three miles had fared, when they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reached bridge and gate, the place of forfeitry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of horse and arms and feminine array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With peril sore of life. On turret high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon first sight of them, a sentinel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beat twice upon the castle's larum-bell.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>And lo, in eager hurry from the gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An elder trotting on hackney made!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he approaching cried, "Await, await!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— Hola! halt, sirs, for here a fine is paid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I to you the usage shall relate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If this has not to you before been said."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the three forthwith began to tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The use established there by Pinnabel.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>He next proceeds, as he had wont before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To counsel other errant cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Unrobe the lady," (said the elder hoar,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"My sons, and leave your steeds and martial geer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor put yourselves in peril, and with four</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such matchless champions hazard the career.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clothes, arms, and coursers every where are rife;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not to be repaired is loss of life."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>" — No more!" (Rogero said) "No more! for I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Am well informed of all, and hither speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the intention, here by proof to try</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If, what my heart has vouched, I am in deed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For sign or threat I yield not panoply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If nought beside I hear, nor vest nor steed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this my comrade, I as surely know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These for mere words as little will forego.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>"But let me face to face, by Heaven, espy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those who would take my horse and arms away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For we have yet beyond that hill to hie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And little time can here afford to stay."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Behold the man," that ancient made reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Clear of the bridge!" — Nor did in this missay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thence a warrior pricked, who, powdered o'er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With snowy flowers, a crimson surcoat wore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Bradamant for long time with earnest prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For courtesy the good Rogero prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To let her from his sell the warrior bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who with white flowers had purfled o'er his vest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But moved him not; and to Rogero's share</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must leave, and do herself, what liked him best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He willed the whole emprize his own should be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Bradamant should stand apart to see.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The Child demanded of that elder, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was he that from the gate first took his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, " 'Tis Sansonet; of crimson hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I know his surcoat, with white flowers gay."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without a word exchanged, the warlike two</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Divide the ground, and short is the delay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For they against each other, levelling low</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their spears, and hurrying sore their coursers, go.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>This while had issued from the fortress near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With many footmen girt, Sir Pinnabel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All ready to despoil the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who in the warlike joust should void is sell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At one another spurred in bold career</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The knights, with their huge lances rested well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Up to the points nigh equal was each stick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of stubborn native oak, and two palms thick.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Sansonet, of such staves, above five pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had made them sever from the living stock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In neighboring wood, and bade his followers bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Two of them hither, destined for that shock:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such truncheons to withstand, well needed-were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A shield and cuirass of the diamond rock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One he had made them give his foe, and one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He kept himself, the present course to run.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>With these which might the solid anvil bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(So well their ends were pointed) there and here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each aiming at the shield his foeman wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The puissant warriors shocked in mid career.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That of Rogero, wrought with magic lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By fiends, had little from the stroke to fear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I of the buckler speak Atlantes made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of whose rare virtues I whilere have said.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>I have already said, the enchanted light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strikes with such force on the beholder's eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, at the shield's discovery, every wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is blinded, or on earth half lifeless lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherefore, well mantled with a veil, the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Keeps it, unless some passing need surprise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impassive is the shield as well believed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since it no damage in the shock received.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>The other by less skilful artist wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did not so well that weightless blow abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, as if smit by thunder, in a thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gave way before the steel, and opened wide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gave way before the griding steel, which sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The arm beneath, by this ill fortified:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that Sir Sansonet was smote, and reeled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his departure, unhorsed upon the field.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>And this was the first comrade of the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That of the tower maintained the usage fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who there had failed another's spoil to gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And voided in the joust his knightly sell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who laughs, as well will sometimes have to plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And find that Fortune will by fits rebel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anew the warder on his larum beats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the other knights the sign repeats.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>This while Sir Pinnabello had drawn near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Bradamant, and prayed that she would shew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What warrior had his knight in the career</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smith with such prowess. That the guerdon due</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his ill deeds might wait the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God's justice that ill-doer thither drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the same courser, which before the Cheat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Bradamant had taken by deceit.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>'Twas now exactly the eighth month was ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since, if you recollect, upon his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The faithless Maganzese, with whom she wended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast into Merlin's tomb the martial may;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When her a bough, which fell with her, defended</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From death, or her good Fortune, rather say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Pinnabel bore off her courser brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming the damsel buried in the cave.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The courser, and, through him, the cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bradamant knew to be the wicked Count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, having heard him, and perused him near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With more attentive eye and front to front —</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"This is the man," (the damsel said) " 'tis clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who erst designed me outrage and affront.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lo! him the traitor's sin doth hither speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all his treasons to receive the meed."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>To threaten him with vengeance, and to lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hands on her sword and charge him now, was done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All in a thought; but first she barred the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which he might his fortilage have won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To earth himself like fox, in his dismay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Pinnabel has every hope foregone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He screaming loud, nor ever making head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the damsel, through the forest fled.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Pale and dismayed his spurs the caitiff plied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose last hope of escape in flight was found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While with her ready sword, Dordona's pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was at his flank, and prest him in his round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hunting him close and ever fast beside:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loud is the uproar, and the woods resound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nothing of this is at the castle kenned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For only to Rogero all attend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The other three, who from the fortress came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This while had issued forth upon their way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And brought with them the ill-accustomed dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who made wayfarers that ill use obey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In all (who rather than prolong with blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their life, would choose to perish in the fray),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The kindling visage burns, and heart is woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That to assail one man so many go.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The cruel courtezan by whom was made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by whose hest maintained, that evil rite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reminds the warriors that they are arrayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By oath and pact, to avenge her in the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"If with this lance alone thy foes are laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On earth, why should I band with other knight?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Guido the savage said) "and, if I lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Off with my head, for I consent to die."</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>So Aquilant, so Gryphon. For the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Singly against a single foe would run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rather would be taken, rather slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than he should be assailed by more than one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To them exclaimed the woman: "Why in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waste you so many words, where fruit is none?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I brought you here that champion's arms to take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not other laws and other pacts to make.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>"You should have offered, when in prison-cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This your excuse; which now too late is made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">'Tis yours the law's observance to compel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not with lying tongue your oath evade."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">" — Behold! the arms; behold, with a new sell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cloth, the goodly steed!" Rogero said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Behold with these, as well, the damsel's vest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If these you covet, why your course arrest?"</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>She of the castle presses on this side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On that Rogero rates, and calls them on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till they parforce, t'wards him, together hied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But red with shame, are to the encounter gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foremost appeared 'mid those three knights of pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Burgundy's good marquis either son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Guido, who was borne on heavier steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came at some interval, with tardier speed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>With the same lance with which he overbore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Sansonet, Rogero came to fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well-covered with the shield which heretofore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Atlantes used on Pyrenean height;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say the enchanted buckler, which, too sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For human sufferance, dazed the astonished sight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To which Rogero, as a last resource,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the most pressing peril had recourse.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Although three times alone the Child was fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(And, certes sore bested) this to display;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Twice when he from the wanton Fairy's reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was to that soberer region on his way!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Last, when the unsated Orc upon the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By this astounded, 'mid the sea-foam lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which would have fed upon the naked maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So cruel to the Child who brought her aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Save these three times, he has preserved the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath its veil, but covered in such wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it may quickly be to sight revealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he in need of its good succour lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this, as said before, he came a-field</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As boldly, as if those three enemies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who were arrayed before him, had appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet less than little children to be feared.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero shocked the valiant Gryphon, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The border of the buckler joined the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who seemed as he would fall, now here, now there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, from his courser far, last fell outright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He at the shield had aimed, but smote not fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mark; and (for Rogero's orb was bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And smooth) the hissing weapon slipt, and wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Other effect than was in Gryphon's thought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>It rent and tore the veil which served to hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lightning's fearful and enchanted rays;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, without blinded eyes, can none abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upright, nor refuge is for them who gaze.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aquilant, who was at his brother's side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tore off the rest, and made the buckler blaze:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The splendour struck the valiant brothers blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Guido in their rear, who spurred behind.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>These here, or there, to earth astonished reel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor eyes alone are dazzled by the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But every sense astounds the flaming steel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unconscious of the issue of the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero turned his horse, and, in the wheel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Handled his sword, so good to thrust and smite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And none descried his fury to oppose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For in the charge dismounted were his foes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>The knights, together with the footmen all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And women, who had from the castle hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor less the coursers panting with their fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if about to die, the warrior spied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He wondered first, and next perceived the pall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of silk was handing down on the left side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say the pall, in which he used to lap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His shield, the evil cause of that mishap.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He quickly turns, and, turning, rolls his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In hopes to view his well-loved martial maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thitherward, without delay, he hies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, when the joust began, the damsel stayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not finding her, it is the Child's surmise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she is gone to bear the stripling aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fearing he may be burnt, while they their journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So long delay, retarded by that tourney.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>He saw the damsel, stretched among the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who him had thither guided: as she lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He took and placed her, yet with sleep opprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before him, and, sore troubled, rode away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with a mantle, which above her vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She wore, concealed the enchanted buckler's ray:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the maid restored, when 'twas concealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her senses, which were ravished by the shield.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XC-->
			<p>
				<span>Away Rogero posted with the dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And did not date his crimsoned visage raise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since every one, it seemed to him, might blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With right that victory, worthy little praise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"By what amends can I of such a shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(The blushing warrior said) the stain eraze?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For 'twill be bruited, all my deeds by sleight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of magic have been done, and not by might."</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCI-->
			<p>
				<span>As, thinking thus, he journeyed on his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero stumbled upon what he sought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, in the middle of the track, there lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A well, within the ground profoundly wrought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whither the thirsty herd, at noon of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Repaired, their paunches with green forage fraught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero said, " 'Tis now, must I provide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I shame from thee, O shield, no more abide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCII-->
			<p>
				<span>"Thee will I keep no more, and this shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even the last shame which so on me is thrown:"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Child, so ending his self-colloquy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dismounting, takes a large and heavy stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to the shield he ties, and bodily</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both to the bottom of the well are gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">"Lie buried there for ever, from all eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with thee hidden be my shame!" he cries.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Filled to the brim with water was the well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heavy the stone, and heavy was the shield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor stopt they till they to the bottom fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the light, liquid element concealed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fame was not slow the noble act to swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, wandering wide, the deed in brief revealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And voicing it abroad, with trumpet-sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Told France and Spain and all the countries round.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCIV-->
			<p>
				<span>When that so strange adventure to the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the wide world, from mouth to mouth was blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knights out of number undertook the quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From neighbouring parts and distant; but unknown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To all remained the forest which possessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The spring wherein the virtuous shield was thrown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For she who told the action, would not say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where was the well, nor in what land it lay.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCV-->
			<p>
				<span>Upon Rogero's parting thence, where fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The four good champions of that evil law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made by the castle's lord Sir Pinnabel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him discomfited like men of straw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">— The shield withdrawn — he had removed as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The light, which quelled their sight and minds who saw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And those, who, like dead men, on earth had lain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had risen, full of wonderment, again.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Nor any thing throughout that livelong day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They 'mid themselves but that strange case relate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how it was in that disastrous fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each by the horrid light was quelled, debate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While these, discoursing, of the adventure say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tidings are brought of Pinnabello's fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Pinnabel is dead the warriors hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But learn not who had slain the cavalier.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Bradamant in close pass, this while, had staid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The faithless Pinnabel, and sorely prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many times had buried half her blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within bleeding flanks and heaving breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When of his crimes the forfeit had been paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him, the infected country's curse and pest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She from the conscious forest turned away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With that good steed the thief had made his prey.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XCVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>She would return where she had left the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But never could make out the road anew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now by valley, now by mountain-height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wandered well-nigh the ample country through.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet could she never (such her fortune's spite)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Find out the way to join Rogero true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him in another canto I attend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who loves the tale, to hear my story's end.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
