<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XL</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-40" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</span>
				</h2>
				<p>
					<span>To fly the royal Agramant is fain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sees Biserta burning far away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But landing finds the royal Sericane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who of his faith gives goodly warrant; they</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defy Orlando, backed by champions twain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom bold Gradasso firmly trusts to slay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For seven kings’ sake, fast prisoners to their foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rogero and the Dane exchange rude blows.</span>
				</p>
			</header>
			<!--I-->
			<p>
				<span>The diverse chances of that sea-fight dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here to rehearse would take a weary while;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to discourse to you upon this head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Great son of Hercules, were to Samos’ isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To carry earthen vessels, as ’tis said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Athens owls, and crocodiles the Nile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that, my lord, by what is vouched to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such things you saw, such things made others see.</span>
			</p>
			<!--II-->
			<p>
				<span>Your faithful people gazed on a long show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That night and day, wherein they crowded stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As in a theatre, and hemmed on Po</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Twixt fire and sword, the hostile navies viewed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What outcries may be heard, what sounds of woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How rivers may run red with human blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In suchlike combat, in how many a mode</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Men die, you saw, and you to many showed.</span>
			</p>
			<!--III-->
			<p>
				<span>I saw not, I, who was compelled to course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Evermore changing nags, six days before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Rome, in heat and haste, some helpful force</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of him our mighty pastor to implore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, after, need was none of foot or horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For so the lion’s beak and claws you tore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-472" id="noteref-472" epub:type="noteref">472</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From that day unto this I hear not said</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he more trouble in your land has bred.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IV-->
			<p>
				<span>But Trotto, present at this victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afranio, Moro, Albert, Hannibal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Zerbinat, Bagno, the Ariostos three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assured me of the mighty feat withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Certified after by that ensignry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Suspended from the holy temple’s wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fifteen galleys at our river-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which with a thousand captive barks I spied.</span>
			</p>
			<!--V-->
			<p>
				<span>He that those wrecks and blazing fires discerned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And such sore slaughter, under different shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which⁠—venging us for hall and palace burned⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While bark remained, raged wide among the foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might also deem how Afric’s people mourned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Agramant, mid diverse deaths and woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On that dark night, when the redouted Dane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assaulted in mid sea the Moorish train.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VI-->
			<p>
				<span>’Twas night, nor gleam was anywhere descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When first the fleets in furious strife were blended;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when lit sulphur, pitch and tar from side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And poop and prow into the sky ascended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the destructive wild-fire, scattered wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fed upon ship and shallop ill defended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The things about them all descried so clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That night was changed to day, as ’twould appear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VII-->
			<p>
				<span>Hence Agramant, that by the dark deceived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had rated not so high the foes’ array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor to encounter such a force believed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But would, if ’twere opposed, at last give way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When that wide darkness cleared, and he perceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(What least he weened upon the first affray)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That twice as many were the ships he fought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As his own Moorish barks, took other thought.</span>
			</p>
			<!--VIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Into a boat he with some few descends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brigliador and some precious things, to flee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so, twixt ship and ship, in silence wends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he finds himself in safer sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far from his own; whom fiery Dudon shends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Reduced to sad and sore extremity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Them steel destroys, fires burn, and waters drown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While he, that mighty slaughter’s cause, is flown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--IX-->
			<p>
				<span>Agramant flies, and with him old Sobrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agramant grieving he had not believed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time that sage foresaw with eye divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And told the woe wherewith he is aggrieved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But turn me to the valiant paladine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, before other aid can be received,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Counsels the duke Biserta to destroy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it no more may Christian France annoy.</span>
			</p>
			<!--X-->
			<p>
				<span>And hence in public order was it said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“The camp should to its arms the third day stand;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this, it was with many barks bested;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all were placed not at the Dane’s command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That fleet the worthy Sansonetto led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(As good a warrior he by sea as land)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which a mile off the port, and overight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Biserta, now was anchored by the knight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XI-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando and the duke, like Christians true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which dare no danger without God for guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That fast and prayer be made their army through,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ordain by proclamation to be cried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that upon the third day, when they view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The signal, all shall bown them, far and wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Biserta’s royal city to attack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which they, when taken, doom to fire and sack.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XII-->
			<p>
				<span>And so, when now devoutly have been done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vigil and vow, and holy prayer and fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kin, friends, and those to one another known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Together feast; who, when with glad repast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their wasted bodies were refreshed, begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To embrace and weep; and acts and speeches past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the banquet’s close, amid those crews</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such as best friends, about to sever, use.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The holy priests within Biserta’s wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pray with their grieving people, and in tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aye beat their bosoms, and for succour call</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon their Mahomet, who nothing hears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What vigils, offerings, and what gifts withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were promised silently, amid their fears!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What temples, statues, images were vowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In memory of their bitter woes, aloud!</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIV-->
			<p>
				<span>And, when the cadi hath his blessing said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The people arms and to the rampart hies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As yet reposing in her Tithon’s bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Aurora was, and dusky were the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When to their posts, their several troops to head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here Sansonetto, there Astolpho flies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when they hear Orlando’s signal blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assault with furious force Biserta’s town.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XV-->
			<p>
				<span>Washed by the sea, upon two quarters, were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The city walls, two stood on the dry shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a construction excellent and rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein was seen the work of days of yore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of other bulwarks was the town nigh bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For since Branzardo there the sceptre bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Few masons at command, and little space</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That monarch had to fortify the place.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVI-->
			<p>
				<span>The Nubian king is charged by England’s peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With sling and arrow so the Moors to gall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That none upon the works shall dare appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And that, protected by the ceaseless fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of stone and dart, in safety cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And footman may approach the very wall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who loaded, some with plank, with rock-stone some,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And some with beam, or weightier burden, come.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVII-->
			<p>
				<span>This and that other thing the Nubians bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by degrees filled-up that channel wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose waters were cut off the day before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that in many parts the ooze was spied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Filled is the ditch in haste from shore to shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And forms a level to the further side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cheering the footmen on the works to mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stand Olivier, Astolpho, and the Count.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>The Nubian upon hope of gain intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impatient of delay, nor heeding how</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With pressing perils they were compassed, went</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Protected by the sheltering boar and sow.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-473" id="noteref-473" epub:type="noteref">473</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With battering ram, and other instrument,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To break the gate and make the turret bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Speedily to the city wall they post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor unprovided find the paynim host.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XIX-->
			<p>
				<span>For steel, and fire, and roof, and turret there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In guise of tempest on the Nubians fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which plank and beam from those dread engines tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made for annoyance of the infidel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the ill beginning, and while dim the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Much injury the christened host befell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when the sun from his rich mansion breaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fortune the faction of the Moor forsakes.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XX-->
			<p>
				<span>The assault is reinforced on every side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Count Orlando, both by sea and land:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fleet, with Sansonetto for its guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Entered the harbour, and approached the strand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sorely they with various engines plied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With arrows and with slings, the paynim band;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sent the assailants scaling-ladder, spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And naval stores, and every needful gear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando, Oliviero, Brandimart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And he, in air so daring heretofore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-474" id="noteref-474" epub:type="noteref">474</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do fierce and furious battle on that part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which lies the furthest inland from the shore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each leads a portion of those Aethiops swart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ordered in equal bands beneath the four,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who at the walls, the gateways, or elsewhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All give of prowess shining proofs and rare.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXII-->
			<p>
				<span>So better could be seen each warrior’s claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in confused in combat there and here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who of reward is worthy, who of shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a thousand and to watchful eyes is clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dragged upon wheels are towers of wooden frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And others well-trained elephants uprear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which so o’ertop the turrets of the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those bulwarks stand a mighty space below.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Brandimart to the walls a ladder brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Climbed, and to climb withal to others cried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many succeed, with bold assurance fraught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For none can fear beneath so good a guide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor was there one who marked, nor one who thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of marking, if such weight it would abide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brandimart only, on the foes intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clambered and fought, and grasped a battlement.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Here clang with hand and foot the daring knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sprang on the embattled wall, and whirled his sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, showing mickle tokens of his might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynims charged, o’erthrew, hewed-down and gored</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But all at once, o’erburthened with that weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ladder breaks beneath the assailing horde;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, saving Brandimart, the Christians all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the ditch with headlong ruin fall.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXV-->
			<p>
				<span>Not therefore blenched the valiant cavalier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor thought he of retreat, albeit was none</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his own band that followed in his rear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although he was a mark for all the town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of many prayed, the warrior would not hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prayer to turn; but mid the foes leapt down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say, into the city took a leap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the town-wall was thirty cubits deep.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>He, without any harm on the hard ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if on feathers or on straw, did light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, like cloth shred and shorn, the paynims round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fury shreds and shears the valiant knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now springs on these, now those, with vigorous bound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these and those betake themselves to flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They that without have seen the leap he made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too late to save him deem all human aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Throughout the squadrons a deep rumour flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A murmur and a whisper, there and here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From mouth to mouth, the Fame by motion grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And told and magnified the tale of fear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For upon many quarters stormed that crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where good Orlando was, where Olivier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where Otho’s son,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-475" id="noteref-475" epub:type="noteref">475</a> she flew on pinions light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor ever paused upon her nimble flight.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Those warriors, and Orlando most of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who love and prize the gentle Brandimart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hearing, should they defy upon that call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They would from so renowned a comrade part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their scaling-ladders plant, and mount the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With rivalry, which shows the kingly heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who carry all such terror in their look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, at the very sight, their foemen shook.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>As on loud ocean, lashed by boisterous gale</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The billows the rash bark assault, and still⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now threatening poop, now threatening prow⁠—assail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, in their rage and fury, fain would fill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pilot sighs and groans, dismayed and pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—He that should aid, and has not heart or skill⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length a surge the pinnace sweeps and swallows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wave on wave in long succession follows;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Thus when those win the wall, they leave a space</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So wide, that who beneath their conduct go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Safely may follow them; for at its base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thousand ladders have been reared below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile the battering rams, in many a place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have breached that wall, and with such mighty blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bold assailant can, from many a part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bear succour to the gallant Brandimart.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>Even with that rage wherewith the stream that reigns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The king of rivers⁠—when he breaks his mound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And makes himself a way through Mantuan plains⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The greasy furrows and glad harvests, round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, with the sheepcotes, flock, and dogs and swains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bears off, in his o’erwhelming waters drowned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Over the elm’s high top the fishes glide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where fowls erewhile their nimble pinions plied;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Even with that rage rushed in the impetuous band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where many breaches in the wall were wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To slay with burning torch and trenchant brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That people, which to evil pass were brought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Murder and rapine there, and violent hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dipt deep in blood and plunder, in a thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Destroy that sumptuous and triumphant town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which of all Afric wore the royal crown.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Filled with dead bodies of the paynim horde,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blood issued from so many a gaping wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fouler fosse was formed and worse to ford</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than girdles the infernal city round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From house to house the fire in fury poured;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mosque, portico, and palace, went to ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And spoiled and empty mansions with the clang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of beaten breast, and groan and outcry rang.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>The victors, laden with their mighty prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From that unhappy city’s gates are gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One with fair vase, and one with rich array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or silver plate from ancient altar won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mother this, that bore the child away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rapes and a thousand evil things were done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of much, and what they cannot hinder, hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Renowned Orlando and fair England’s peer.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>By Olivier, amid that slaughter wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell Bucifaro of the paynim band;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And⁠—every hope and comfort cast aside⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Branzardo slew himself with his own brand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pierced with three wounds whereof he shortly died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Folvo was taken by Astolpho’s hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monarchs three, intrusted to whose care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agramant’s African dominions were.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Agramant, who had left without a guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His fleet this while, and with Sobrino fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wept over his Biserta when he spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those fires that on the royal city fed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When nearer now the king was certified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How in that cruel strife his town had sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thought of dying, and himself had slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that Sobrino’s words his arm restrain.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>“What victory, my lord,” (Sobrino cries)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Could better than thy death the Christian cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whence he might hope to joy in quiet wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair Africa, from all annoyance clear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy being yet alive this hope denies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence shall he evermore have cause for fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For well the foeman knows, save thou art gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He for short time will fill thine Afric throne.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“Thy subjects by thy death deprived will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of hope, the only good they have in store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou, if thou liv’st, I trust, shalt set us free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Redeem from trouble, and to joy restore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Captives for ever, if thou diest, are we;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Afric is tributary evermore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although not for thyself, yet not to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My liege, annoyance to thy followers, live.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“The soldan, he thy neighbour, will be won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surely with men and money thee to aid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By him with evil eye King Pepin’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So strong in Africa, will be surveyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All efforts to restore thee to thy throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Norandine, thy kinsman, will be made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turk, Persian and Armenian, Arab, Mede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If prayed, will all assist thee in thy need.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--XL-->
			<p>
				<span>In such and such like words, with wary art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hope of quickly winning back his reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sobrino soothed the king, while in his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He other thought perchance did entertain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well knows he to what pass, what evil mart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That lord is brought; how often sighs in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whoe’er foregoes the sceptre which he swayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to barbarians hath recourse for aid.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLI-->
			<p>
				<span>Jugurtha, martial Hannibal, and more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In ancient times, good proof of this afford:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In our own era, Lewis, hight the Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Delivered into other Lewis’ ward.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-476" id="noteref-476" epub:type="noteref">476</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your brother, Duke Alphonso, wiser lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Learned from their fate;⁠—I speak to you, my lord⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wont them as very madmen to decry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That more on others than themselves rely;</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLII-->
			<p>
				<span>And therefore aye, throughout that warfare drear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waged by the pontiff, in his fierce disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit upon his feeble powers the peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could ill depend, though from Italian plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was driven the friend that aided him whilere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And by the foe possessed was Naples’ reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He against menace, against promise steeled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ne’er to another would his dukedom yield.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Eastward King Agramant had turned his prow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seaward steered his bark, of Afric wide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When from the land a wicked wind ’gan blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And took the reeling vessel on one side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The master, seated at the helm, his brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Raised towards heaven, and to the monarch cried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I see so fell and fierce a tempest form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our pinnace cannot face the pelting storm.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIV-->
			<p>
				<span>“If you, my lords, will listen to my lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An isle is on our left-hand; and to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seems that it were well to make that shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till overblown the tempest’s fury be.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his advice assents the royal Moor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And makes the larboard land, from peril free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, for the sailor’s weal, when tempests rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twixt Vulcan’s lofty forge and Afric lies.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-477" id="noteref-477" epub:type="noteref">477</a></span>
			</p>
			<!--XLV-->
			<p>
				<span>With juniper and myrtle overgrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of habitations is that islet bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A pleasing solitude; and where alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Harbour wild stag and roebuck, deer and hare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, save to fishermen, is little known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That oftentimes on the shorn brambles there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hang their moist nets; meanwhile, untroubled sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The scaly fishes in their quiet deep.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Here other vessel, sheltered from the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They found, by tempest tost upon that land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which had conveyed the king of Sericane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Erewhile from Arles; on one and the other hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In reverent wise and worthy of the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those valiant kings embraced upon the strand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For friends the monarchs were, and late before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The walls of Paris, arms together bore.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVII-->
			<p>
				<span>With much displeasure Sericana’s knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heard by King Agramant his griefs displayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then him consoled, and in his cause to fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like courteous king, the kindly offer made:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But brooked nat, that to Egypt’s people, light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lacking faith, he should resort for aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“That thither it is perilous to wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exiles (he said) are warned by Pompey’s end.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“And for Senapus’ Aethiopian crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have come beneath Astolpho, as ye show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wrest your fruitful Africa from you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And burnt and laid her chiefest city low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with their squadrons is Orlando, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was wandering void of wit, short while ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fittest cure for all, whereby to scape</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out of this trouble I, meseems, can shape.</span>
			</p>
			<!--XLIX-->
			<p>
				<span>“I, for your love, will undertake the quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Count in single combat to appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He vainly would, I wot, with me contest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If wholly made of copper or of steel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I rate the Christian church, were he at rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As wolf rates lambs, when hungering for his meal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Next have I thought how of the Nubian band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—A brief and easy task⁠—to free your land.</span>
			</p>
			<!--L-->
			<p>
				<span>“I will make other Nubians, they that hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another faith, divided by Nile’s course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Arabs and Macrobians (rich in gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And men are <em>these</em>, and <em>those</em> in herds of horse),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chaldaean, Perse, and many more, controlled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By my good sceptre, in such mighty force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will make them war upon the Nubians’ reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those reavers shall not in your land remain.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LI-->
			<p>
				<span>Gradasso’s second offer seemed to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Most opportune to King Troyano’s son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And much he blest the chances of the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which him upon that desert isle had thrown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet would not upon any pact agree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Nay, not to repossess Biserta’s town⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gradasso should for him in fight contend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Deeming too sore his honour ’twould offend.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LII-->
			<p>
				<span>“If Roland is to be defied, more due</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The battle is to me (that king replies)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am prepared for it; and let God do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His will by me, in good or evil wise.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“⁠—Follow my mode; another mode and new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which comes into my mind” (Gradasso cries),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Let both of us together wage this fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against Orlando and another knight.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“So not left out, I care not, if I be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first or last (said Agramant): I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In arms no better can I find than thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though I should seek a comrade, high or low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what (Sobrino cried) becomes of me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I should be more expert if old in show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And evermore in peril it is good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Force should have Counsel in his neighbourhood.”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Stricken in years, yet vigorous was the sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And well had proved himself with sword and spear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said, “he found himself in gray old age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such as in green and supple youth whilere.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They own his claim, and for an embassage</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forthwith a courier find, then bid him “steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Africa, where camped the Christians lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Count Orlando on their part defy;</span>
			</p>
			<!--LV-->
			<p>
				<span>“With equal number of armed knights to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Matching his foes, on Lampedosa’s shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where on all quarters that circumfluent sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which they are inisled, is heard to roar.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The paynim messenger unceasingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like one in needful haste, used sail and oar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he found Roland in Biserta, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The host beneath his eye their plunder share.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVI-->
			<p>
				<span>From those three monarchs to the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The invitation was in public told;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So pleasing to Anglante’s valiant peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the herald he was liberal of his gold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From his companions had he heard whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Durindane was in Gradasso’s hold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hence, to retrieve that faulchion from the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To India had the Count resolved to go:</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Deeming he should not find that king elsewhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, so he heard, had sailed from the French shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A nearer place is offered now; and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hopes Gradasso shall his prize restore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moved also by Almontes’ bugle rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To accept the challenge which the herald bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor less by Brigliadoro; since he knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Agramant’s possession were the two.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He chose for his companions in the fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The faithful Brandimart and Olivier:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well has he proved the one and the other’s might;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knows he alike to both is passing dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Good horses and good armour seeks the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And goodly swords and lances, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For him and his; meseems to you is known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How none of those three warriors had his own.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Orlando (as I oft have certified)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In fury <em>his</em> had scattered wide and far;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rodomont took the others’, which beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The river, locked in that high turret are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Few throughout Africa could they provide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As well because to France, in that long war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Agramant had born away the best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As because Africa but few possest.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LX-->
			<p>
				<span>What could be had of armour, rusted o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And brown with age, Orlando bids unite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile with his companions on the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He walks, discoursing on the future fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So wandering from their camp three miles and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It chanced that, turning towards the sea their sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under full sail approaching, they descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A helmless barque, with nought her course to guide.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXI-->
			<p>
				<span>She, without pilot, without crew, alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As wind and fortune ordered it, was bound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vessel neared the shore, with sails full-blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Furrowing the waves, until she took the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But ere of these three warriors more be shown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The love wherewith I to the Child am bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his story brings me back, and bids record</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What past ’twixt him and Clermont’s warlike lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXII-->
			<p>
				<span>I spake of that good pair of warriors, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had both retreated from the martial fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beholding pact and treaty broken through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And every troop and band in disarray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which leader to his oath was first untrue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And was occasion of such evil, they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Study to learn of all the passing train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">King Agramant or the Emperor Charlemagne.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile a servant of the Child’s, at hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Faithful, expert and wary was the wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor in the shock of either furious band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had ever of his warlike lord lost sight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To bold Rogero bore his horse and brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he might aid his comrades now in flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero backed the steed and grasped the sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not in battle mixed that martial lord.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>Thence he departed; but he first renewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His compact with Montalban’s knight⁠—that so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His Agramant convinced of perjury stood⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Him and his evil sect he would forego.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That day no further feats of hardihood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero will perform against the foe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He but demands of all that make for Arles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Who first broke faith, King Agramant or Charles?”</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXV-->
			<p>
				<span>From all he hears repeated, far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Agramant had broke the promise plight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He loves that king, and from his side to veer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For this, believes would be no error light.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-478" id="noteref-478" epub:type="noteref">478</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Moors were broke and scattered (this whilere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has been rehearsed) and from the giddy height</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of <b>Her</b> revolving wheel were downward hurled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who at her pleasure rolls this nether world.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero ponders if he should remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or rather should his sovereign lord attend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love for his lady fits him with a rein</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bit, which lets him not to Afric wend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wheels him, and to a counter course again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spurs him, and threats his restive mood to shend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save he maintains the treaty, and the troth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pledged to the paladin with solemn oath.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>A wakeful, stinging care, on the other side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scourges and goads no less the cavalier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest, if he now from Agramant divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He should be taxed with baseness or with fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If many deem it <em>well</em> he should abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To many and many it would <em>ill</em> appear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many would say, that oaths unbinding are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which ’tis unlawful and unjust to swear.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>He all that day and the ensuing night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Remains alone, and so the following day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forever sifting in his doubtful sprite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If it be better to depart or stay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lastly for Agramant decides the knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him in Afric will he wend his way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moved by his love for his liege-lady sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But moved by honour and by duty more.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>He made for Arles, where yet he hoped would ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fleet which him to Africa might bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor in the port nor offing ships espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor Saracens save dead beheld he there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Agramant had swept the roadstead wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And burnt what vessels in the haven were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rogero takes the road, when his hope fails,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Along the sea-beat shore toward Marseilles.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXX-->
			<p>
				<span>Upon some boat he hoped to lay his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which him for love or force should thence convey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Already Ogier’s son had made the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the barbarians’ fleet, his captive prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You could not there have cast a grain of sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between those vessels; moored closely lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mighty squadrons to that harbour brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With conquerors these, and those with prisoners fraught.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>The vessels of the Moor that were not made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The food of fire and water on that night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Saving some few that fled) were all conveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Safe to Marseilles by the victorious knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seven of those kings, that Moorish sceptres swayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, having seen their squadron put to flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With their seven ships had yielded to the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stood mute and weeping, overwhelmed with woe.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>Dudon had issued forth upon dry land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bent to find Charlemagne that very day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the Moorish spoil and captive band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made in triumphal pomp a long display.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prisoners all were ranged upon the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And round them stood their Nubian victors gay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, shouting in his praise, with loud acclaim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made all that region ring with Dudon’s name.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIII-->
			<p>
				<span>Rogero, when from far the ships he spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Believed they were the fleet of Agramant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, to know further, pricked his courser’s side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, nearer, mid those knights of mickle vaunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nasamon’s king a prisoner he descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Agricalt, Bambirago, Farurant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Balastro, Manilardo, and Rimedont;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who stood with weeping eyes and drooping front.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIV-->
			<p>
				<span>In their unhappy state to leave that crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Child, who loved those monarchs, cannot bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That useless is the empty hand he knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That where force is not, little profits prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He couched his lance, their keeper overthrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then proved his wonted might with faulchion bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in a moment stretched upon the strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above a hundred of the Nubian band.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXV-->
			<p>
				<span>The noise Sir Dudon hears, the slaughter spies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But knows not who the stranger cavalier:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He marks how, put to rout, his people flies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With anguish, with lament and mighty fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quickly for courser, shield, and helmet cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Bosom, and arms, and thighs, were mailed whilere)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaps on his horse, nor⁠—having seized his lance⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forgets he is a paladin of France.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVI-->
			<p>
				<span>He called on every one to stand aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the galling spur his courser prest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meanwhile a hundred other foes have died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And filled with hope was every prisoner’s breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as Rogero holy Dudon spied<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-479" id="noteref-479" epub:type="noteref">479</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Approach on horseback, (footmen were the rest,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Esteeming him their head, he charged the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Impelled by huge desire to prove his might.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVII-->
			<p>
				<span>Already, on his part, had moved the Dane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when he saw the Child without a spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He flang is own far from him, in disdain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To take such vantage of the cavalier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Admiring at Sir Dudon’s courteous vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Belie himself he cannot,” said the peer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“And of those perfect warriors must be one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That as the paladins of France are known.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXVIII-->
			<p>
				<span>“If I my will can compass, he shall shew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His name, to me, ere further deed be done.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He made demand; and in the stranger knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dudon, the Danish Ogier’s valiant son:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He from Rogero claimed an equal due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And from the Child as courteous answer won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Their names on either side announced⁠—the foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A bold defiance speak, and come to blows.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXIX-->
			<p>
				<span>Bold Dudon had with him that iron mace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which won him deathless fame in many a fight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherewith he proved him fully of the race</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that good Danish warrior, famed for might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That best of faulchions, which through iron case</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of cuirass or of casque was wont to bite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Youthful Rogero from the scabbard snatched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the martial Dane his valour matched.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXX-->
			<p>
				<span>But for the gentle youth was ever willed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To offend his lady-love the least he could,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knew he should offend her, if he spilled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that disastrous battle, Dudon’s blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Well in the lineage of French houses skilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He wist of Beatrice’s sisterhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">—Bradamant’s mother she⁠—with Armelline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mother of the Danish paladine).</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXI-->
			<p>
				<span>He therefore never thrust in that affray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rarely smote an edge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-480" id="noteref-480" epub:type="noteref">480</a> on plate and chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now warding off the mace, now giving way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the fall of that descending bane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turpin believes, it in Rogero lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sir Dudon in few sword-strokes to have slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet never when the Dane his guard foregoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save on the faulchion’s flat descend the blows.</span>
			</p>
			<!--LXXXII-->
			<p>
				<span>The flat as featly as the edge he plies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that good faulchion forged of stubborn grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, at strange blindman’s bluff, in weary wise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-481" id="noteref-481" epub:type="noteref">481</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hammers on Dudon with such might and main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He often dazzles so the warrior’s eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That hardly he his saddle can maintain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to win better audience for my rhyme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My canto I defer to other time.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
